vol
STANLEY J. GRENZ, DAVID GURETZKI & CHERITH FEE NORDLING
Preface
A Note to the Reader
"You can't know the players without a scorecard!" claim the program
vendors as they make their way through ballpark stands. In a similar
manner we might say, "You can't understand theology without definitions."
This Pocket Dictionary attempts to provide a basic understanding of the
three hundred or so significant words and concepts you are most likely to
encounter in the theological books and articles you are reading. The
entries consist primarily of English terms, but we also have included key
foreign phrases-especially Latin and German-as well as a select group of
theologians who have played central roles in the history of theology.
In using the Pocket Dictionary keep several things in mind. First, the
format of the book is quite simple. The terms, phrases and names are
arranged together in alphabetical order. Second, we have focused our
attention on basic, generally held definitions. Rather than being exhaustive
treatments, therefore, our descriptions seek to provide you with a
foundational, working knowledge of the concepts. This working
knowledge in turn ought to place you in a position to glean a fuller
understanding from the theology texts you are reading, the lectures you are
hearing or even the information you find in more exhaustive theological
dictionaries. Third, while much of the material we present is generally
accepted among the various Christian traditions, the fact that we write
from a broadly evangelical, Protestant perspective is clearly evident from
time to time.
The Pocket Dictionary is a reference book. Thus we do not intend that
you read it from cover to cover. Rather we anticipate that you will have it
next to you or on your desk as you read theological literature. You can then
consult the Pocket Dictionary when you come across a term that is
unfamiliar to you. If you are a student, you might also use it as a "crib
sheet" to help you prepare for whatever definition-oriented exams you
might encounter.
Being a reference book, the Pocket Dictionary is cross-referenced. An
asterisk before a term or phrase indicates that it appears elsewhere in the
book as a separate entry. See and see also references indicate entries that
might provide additional information. Typical abbreviations found in
reference works like the Pocket Dictionary include c. (circa) meaning
"approximately," b. standing for "born" and d. meaning "died."
As members of Christ's church and disciples of Jesus we find reading
theology highly rewarding. We hope you will too. And we hope that this
Pocket Dictionary will assist you in the process.
The Authors
A
a posteriori, a priori. Terms used to refer to whether an assertion is
dependent on experience (a posteriori) or independent of experience (a
priori). For example, if one observes creation and sees in it an organized
pattern, it might be concluded a posteriori (i.e., on the basis of observing
creation) that God exists as its cause. However, if God's existence can be
proved on some basis prior to sense experience, then the existence of God
is argued a priori.
accommodation. Speaks of God making himself known to humans in
words and ways suitable for the finite human mind to comprehend. The
most significant example in which God accommodates to humankind is
found in the coming of Jesus Christdeity taking human form. See also
incarnation.
adiaphora. Items of belief not essential to *salvation. In Lutheran thought
the adiaphora were defined as practices of the church that were neither
commanded nor forbidden in Scripture. In contemporary terms, adiaphora
are those things not clearly addressed by Scripture that Christians may
freely practice or believe with a clear conscience before God and that do
not affect salvation.
adoption. God's act of making otherwise estranged human beings part of
God's spiritual family by including them as inheritors of the riches of
divine glory. This adoption takes place through our receiving in faith the
work of Jesus Christ the Son (Jn 3:16), being born of the Spirit (Jn 3:5-6)
and receiving the Spirit of adoption (Rom 8:15-16). See also
reconciliation.
adoptionism. The theory that asserts that God adopted Jesus of Nazareth as
his Son. In other words, Jesus was born human but became God's Son at a
particular point in his life. This theory fails to reflect scriptural texts that
point to Jesus' eternal relationship with the Father (e.g., Jn 17:5).
advent. Literally meaning "coming" or "arrival," this term refers to the
coming of Jesus Christ to earth to provide *salvation by his life, death,
resurrection and ascension. Christians now anticipate a second advent
when Christ will return to earth in bodily form to receive the church and to
judge the nations. The term Advent also refers to a season of the church
year during which the church prepares to commemorate Christ's first
coming to earth (Christmas). The Advent season encompasses the four
Sundays prior to Christmas Day. See also parousia.
aesthetics (esthetics). The area of philosophy formally concerned with
defining the nature of beauty and discovering criteria or standards by
which something can be evaluated as beautiful. In Christian theology
beauty is usually defined as what reflects in some way God's own
character and nature. See also ethics.
agnosticism. Literally,
"no knowledge" and taken from two Greek terms, a
(no) and gnosis (knowledge). In a more formal sense agnosticism refers to
a system of belief in which personal opinion about religious statements
(e.g., "God exists") is suspended because it is assumed that they can be
neither proven nor disproven or because such statements are seen as
irrelevant. See also atheism.
Alexandrian school. So called because of its origin in the city of
Alexandria (Egypt), this Christian center of scholarship was led first by
Clement of Alexandria in A.D. 190 and then by *Origen in A.D. 202. The
Alexandrian school was influenced by the philosophy of Plato and
understood the task of biblical interpretation as seeking out its literal,
moral and allegorical senses. In other words, the Alexandrian theologians
taught that although the Bible was literally true, its correct interpretation
lay in the moral or allegorical senses more than in the literal sense. See
also Antiochene school.
allegory, allegorical method. An allegory is a story in which the details
correspond to or reveal a "hidden," "higher" or "deeper" meaning. The
allegorical method of biblical interpretation assumes that biblical stories
should be interpreted by seeking the "spiritual" meaning to which the
literal sense points. See also typology.
arnillennialism. The belief that the thousand years mentioned in
Revelation 20 do not represent a specific period of time between Christ's
first and second comings. Many amillennialists believe instead that the
*millennium refers to the heavenly reign of Christ and the departed saints
during the Church Age. Amillennialists usually understand Revelation 20
to mean that the return of Christ will occur at the end of history and that
the church presently lives in the final era of history. See also
premillennialism; postmillennialism.
Anabaptist. A general term referring to several varied movements coming
out of the Protestant *Reformation in the 16th century, often referred to as
the *Radical Reformation. Anabaptists rejected infant baptism as
practiced in the Lutheran and Reformed churches. Furthermore,
Anabaptists believed that these churches either had been corrupted or had
not separated themselves fully from what the Anabaptists considered to be
errors of the Roman Catholic Church. Anabaptists therefore urged their
followers to be baptized as conscious disciples of Christ. Significant
Anabaptists include Menno Simons and Jacob Hutter. See also
Mennonites.
analogy of being (analogia entis). The argument that there is sufficient
similarity between God and creation so that observation of the universe
will yield a limited understanding of God's nature. The analogy of being is
usually said to extend more to humans than to the universe itself, in that
humans are created in the image of God (see imago Dei). Contemporary
theologians have debated the extent to which sinful humans can perceive
creation as pointing to God. Some theologians (e.g., Karl *Barth) reject
completely the use of the analogy of being as a valid theological principle.
analogy of faith (analogia fidei). A principle of interpretation that suggests
that clearer passages of Scripture should be used to interpret more obscure
or difficult passages. For *Augustine the analogy of faith requires that
Scripture never be interpreted in such a way that it violates the church's
summary of Christian faith (i.e., the Apostles' Creed). For Luther, Christ is
the analogy of faith, so that Scripture needs always to be interpreted as
testifying to Christ. For Calvin the analogy of faith assumes that because
the Spirit oversaw its writing, Scripture and the Spirit together interpret
other parts of Scripture.
analytical philosophy. An early twentieth-century philosophical movement
that sought to understand how a sentence "means" something. Early
analytical philosophers (e.g., A. J. Ayer) asserted that sentences are
meaningful only if they can be verified or falsified in some way, at least
theoretically. This suggests that religious, ethical and poetic sentences are
meaningless, in that they can neither be verified nor falsified. See also
logical positivism.
Anglican, Anglicanism. Anglicanism began in seventeenthcentury England
as part of the English Reformation and continues as the state church of
England. Anglicanism was formed out of the theology of *Protestantism,
especially *Calvinism, but maintained a strong affinity to the worship and
structure of the Roman Catholic Church. Common to all of Anglicanism is
its use of the *Book of Common Prayer in worship. It declares the central
Anglican principle: "The rule of prayer is the rule of belief."
anhypostasis. The belief that Christ in his incarnation did not take
characteristics of a specific human being upon himself, but rather took on
humanity in a "generic" sense. Thus Jesus of Nazareth was not so much a
"new" human as much as he was "like" a human in every way.
Traditionally, the church has rejected the anhypostasis theory as an
inadequate explanation of Christ's humanity.
animism. A system of belief that asserts that spirit beings are the cause of
all movement, growth or change (animation) in the world. Although many
animists acknowledge one most pow- crful god, they are highly sensitive
to the presence of the spiritual in the world. Animists, therefore, would
explain various movements, such as the growth of a tree, the rustling of its
leaves and the shedding of its leaves, as visible effects of invisible spirits.
annihilationism. The belief that all the wicked will be judged by God and
thrown into the lake of fire, where they will cease to exist. Some
annihilationists suggest that this will occur instantaneously, while others
believe that the unrighteous may experience a brief period of awareness.
However, all annihilationists agree that no individual, however wicked,
will suffer eternally a conscious existence in hell. See also conditional
immortality.
Anseim of Canterbury (1033-1109). A medieval monk, philosopher and
theologian who eventually became the archbishop of Canterbury, England.
Anselm is best known for his formulation of the *ontological argument for
the existence of God, as well as his *satisfaction theory of the atonement.
Anselm also sought to understand the reasons that God had to become
human in Christ and give himself as a sacrifice for sin. Anselm understood
the task of theology as fides quaerens intellectum (faith seeking
understanding).
anthropology. From the Greek words anthropos (human) and logos (word),
that is, words about, or teaching concerning, humankind. Anthropology in
general refers to any study of the status, habits, customs, relationships and
culture of humankind. In a more specific and theological sense,
anthropology sets forth the scriptural teachings about humans as God's
creatures. Christian anthropology recognizes that humans are created in
God's image (*imago Dei) but that sin has in some way negatively
affected that image. Anthropology is also interested in the question of the
constitution of a human being, that is, the relationship between body, soul,
spirit and so on.
anthropomorphism. A figure of speech used by writers of Scripture in
which human physical characteristics arc attributed to God for the sake of
illustrating an important point. For example, Scripture sometimes speaks
of the "face" or "arm" of God, even though God is revealed to be Spirit and
not limited in time and space by the constraints of a physical body.
Anthropomorphisms essentially help to make an otherwise abstract truth
about God more concrete.
antichrist. Literally,
"against Christ," the term refers to individual, social
or ideological opposition to the words and deeds of Christ. Some
theologians understand the antichrist to be a future individual who will
oppose Christ and whose rule in the world will serve as a sign of the
nearness of Christ's second coming. The term appears only in the letters of
John, yet biblical writers in both the OT and the NT used similar concepts,
such as "sons of Belial" (as found in the Pentateuch and historical books);
"the little horn" (Daniel); "the abomination of desolation" (Matthew and
Mark, see Daniel); and the "man of lawlessness" (Paul).
antinomianism. An ethical system that denies the binding nature of any
supposedly absolute or external laws on individual behavior. Some
antinomianists argue that Christians need not preach or practice the laws
of the OT because Christ's merits have freed Christians from the law.
Others, like the early *Gnostics, teach that spiritual perfection comes
about through the attainment of a special knowledge rather than by
obedience to law. Generally, Christian theology has rejected
antinomianism on the basis that although Christians are not saved through
keeping the law, we still have a responsibility to live uprightly, that is, in
obedience to God's law of love in service to one another (Gal 5:13-14) as
we walk by the Spirit (Gal 5:16) who continually works to transform us
into the image of Christ the Creator (Col 3:1, 7-10).
antinomy. The bringing together of two principles, statements or laws that,
even though appearing to be contradictory to or in tension with one
another, are both believed to be true. A theological example of an
antinomy is the belief in both the absolute sovereignty of God and human
free will. Although both are held to be true, there is a tension between
God's will and our human will that cannot be easily or fully understood.
See also paradox.
Antiochene school. So called because it arose in the city ofAntioch in the
third to fifth centuries A.D., the Antiochene school practiced an approach
to scriptural interpretation that emphasized the literal meaning of the text.
This was in reaction to the *Alexandrian school of interpretation, which
sought "deeper" allegorical, moral or spiritual meanings not immediately
evident in the text. Important figures in the Antiochene school include
Chrysostom, Theodor, Theodoret and Theophilus. See also Alexandrian
school.
apocalypse. From the Greek word meaning "unveiling." Its use as the title
of the last book of the NT (the book of Revelation, or the Apocalypse)
arises from John's opening phrase: apokalypsis Iesou Christou (Revelation
of Jesus Christ).
apocalyptic literature, apocalypticism. Certain portions of the Bible
(including Daniel 7-12 and the book of Revelation) arc often categorized
as apocalyptic literature, a genre or type of Jewish literature that became
popular during the intertestamental period and extended into the NT era (c.
400 B.C. to A.D. 100). The writers of apocalyptic literature sought to
disclose "heavenly secrets" concerning how the world would end and how
the kingdom of God would suddenly appear to destroy the kingdom of
evil. Apocalyptic writers made extensive use of visions, dreams and
symbols as instruments of revealing what was hidden. Apocalypticism has
been variously defined as a social movement or ideology arising out of an
oppressed subgroup in a society, whether ancient or modern, which in
defining its identity seeks release from oppression by seeing a future
reality as more important than the present state of affairs.
apokatastasis. A Greek word loosely translated as "restoration." In the OT
the Hebrew equivalent of the term referred to the return of Israel from
exile (see Jer 16:15). In the NT apokatastasis speaks of a future time when
God in Christ will restore all things in creation according to God's original
intention. Some theologians have taken this to mean that at the end of
history all humankind (and perhaps even Satan and his demons) will be
saved. Generally, Christian theology has rejected the idea of a universal
*salvation. See also universalism.
Apollinarianism, Apollinarius. The teaching of the fourthcentury bishop of
Laodicea Apollinarius (c. 310-391), who declared that in his incarnation
Christ took on a human body and soul but not a human mind or spirit
(nous). Apollinarius argued that to have a human spirit is to have a free
will. But where there is free will, there is also sin. Therefore, Apollinarius
concluded, Christ operated solely on the basis of a divine mind or nous.
The church officially rejected Apollinarianism at the Second Ecumenical
Council at Constantinople in A.D. 381.
apologetics. Occasionally called eristics, apologetics is the formal defense
of the Christian faith. Historically, Christian theologians have differed as
to whether apologetics is appropriate to the presentation of the gospel, and
if so, how it should be accomplished. Depending on how they have
answered these questions, apologists have appealed to rational
argumentation, empirical evidence, fulfilled prophecy, authorities of the
church or mystical experience in defending such beliefs as the existence of
God, the authority of Scripture, the deity of Christ and the historicity of
Jesus' resurrection. See also polemics.
apophatic theology. Generally, any kind of theology that assumes that
positive description of God is impossible, for by definition God, as an
uncreated being, does not fit into normal categories of human language
and thought. As a result, apophatic theology is often called "negative
theology" because it assumes that all that human language can do is assert
what God is not-for example, that God is infinite (not finite), immutable
(not changing), immortal (not mortal). As a result, apophatic theology
suggests that God is known positively through spiritual experience rather
than through rational expression. Apophatic theology is of key importance
in the Eastern Orthodox tradition. See also Eastern Orthodoxy; via
eminentia, via negativa, via causalitatus.
apostasy. A biblical concept that generally refers to those who fall away
from belief in God. Broadly speaking, apostasy has been defined in four
ways: as referring to a person who falls away and fails to keep a religious
covenant (Judaism), who falls away from the church (Roman
Catholicism), who falls away from intellectual adherence to Christianity
(*Augustinianism/*Calvinism), or who falls away from *salvation once
experienced (*Semi-Pelagianism/Arminianism). Scripture repeatedly and
clearly warns of the dangers and results of apostasy (e.g., Heb 6:4-8).
apostle, apostolicity. Derived from the Greek term apostolos, an apostle is
basically a "sent one." From his many followers Christ chose twelve whom
he designated as "apostles" (Mt 10:2-4; Mk 3:14; Lk 6:14-16). These
twelve, along with the apostle Paul as one "abnormally born" (1 Cor 15:8),
became foundational in the establishment of the church and functioned as
authority figures in the early church. As a result, the idea of apostolicity
has to do with the correspondence of the faith and practice of the church to
the authoritative NT teaching attributed to the apostles.
appropriation. A general term used in theology to speak of the integration
or application of an aspect of the Christian belief system into Christian
practice. Thus it is not enough to have an intellectual concept of faith and
trust in Christ without actually exercising faith and trust in Christ. The
believer's exercising of faith, then, is called the appropriation of faith.
Aquinas, Thomas (1225-1274). Medieval Italian theologian and monk
whose work was declared to be the official teaching of the Roman Catholic
Church by Pope Leo XIII in 1879. Aquinas's greatest influence is found in
his * Summa Theologica, a systematic presentation of Christian theology
based on the philosophical system of Aristotle. One of his more famous
contributions was a thorough discussion of the *Five Ways (proofs) for the
existence of God.
Arianism, Arius. An early heretical teaching about the identity of Jesus
Christ. Arianism was founded primarily on the teachings of Arius (d.
335/336). The central characteristic of Arian thought was that because God
is one, Jesus could not have also been truly God. In order to deal with the
scriptural testimony to the exalted status of Christ, Arius and his followers
proposed that Jesus was the highest created being of God. So although
Christ was fully human, he was not fully God. Anus's teaching was
condemned as heretical at the First Ecumenical *Council (Nicaea) in A.D.
325.
Arminianism, Arminius. A system of theology founded on the thought of
James Arminius (1560-1609), a Dutch theologian and pastor. Arminianism
as a theological system developed mainly as a response to Lutheran and
especially Calvinist views on the doctrine of *predestination. Unlike
Calvinists (and Lutherans), who saw predestination as an unconditional
action of God in electing individuals to *salvation, Arminius taught that
predestination was based on God's foreknowledge in seeing whether an
individual would freely accept or reject Christ. The resulting theology also
asserted that insofar as *salvation is freely chosen, it could also be freely
lost-a concept foreign to Calvinist and Lutheran understandings. See also
Calvinism, John Calvin.
ascension. When Christ had finished his earthly ministry, he entered the
presence of the Father (Mk 16:19; Lk 24:51; Acts 1:9). This event, known
as the ascension, is significant for at least three reasons. First, the
ascension ended the earthly, visible ministry of Christ and prepared the
way for the promised coming of the Holy Spirit to minister invisibly
through the church. Second, the ascension exalted Christ to the right hand
of the Father, where he now reigns as Lord over the cosmos and serves as
the great high priest, interceding on behalf of God's people (Heb 7:24;
8:2). Third, the ascension functions as a reminder that Christ will once
again appear visibly from the heavens at his second coming (Acts 1:11).
asceticism. The teaching that spirituality is attained through renunciation
of physical pleasures and personal desires while concentrating on
"spiritual" matters. Jesus himself advocated certain practices such as
fasting (Mt 9:15) or, for some perhaps, celibacy (Mt 19:12) for the sake of
the kingdom; yet some Christians have overemphasized the role of ascetic
practices. This prompted the apostle Paul to assert that ascetic practice
alone is insufficient as a means of escaping from sin (see Col 2:20-23).
Unfortunately, asceticism often proceeds on the assumption that the
physical body is evil and is ultimately the cause of sin-a wholly unbiblical
concept. See also Gnosticism.
aseity. A term derived from the Latin a se,
"from oneself." Aseity, as a
divine attribute, refers to God's self-existence. In other words, God is not
dependent upon anything else for existence but has eternally existed
without any external or prior cause.
assensus. A Latin term referring to the intellectual assent to or acceptance
of a theological truth. While the biblical concept of faith includes the idea
of assensus, it should not be equated with saving faith. One who exercises
biblical faith assents to the truth that Jesus is both human and divine;
however, assensus does not guarantee that biblical faith is present, for, as
James notes,
"even the demons believe" (Jas 2:19); that is, they give
intellectual assent while not exercising saving faith in Christ. See also
faith; fiducia; notitia.
assumption of Mary. A teaching originating in Roman Catholic thought
during the medieval period that suggests that on her death Mary was
transported (assumed), body and soul, into the heavenly presence of God.
This doctrine was upheld by Pope Pius XII in 1950 as an official Roman
Catholic *dogma. There is no scriptural substantiation for this teaching,
however. NonRoman Catholic theologians therefore generally reject it. See
also immaculate conception.
assurance. The doctrine that teaches the possibility of Christians' knowing
that they truly are children of God. The apostle John teaches that assurance
comes both as a result of living an obedient Christian life (1 Jn 2:3-6) and
through the abiding presence and inner testimony of the Holy Spirit (1 Jn
4:13).
Athanasius (c. 296-373). An early church apologist, theologian and bishop
of Alexandria. Athanasius's greatest contribution to Christian theology
was his uncompromising stance against the popular Arian teaching of his
day. See also Arianism, Arius.
atheism. A system of belief that asserts categorically that there is no God.
Atheism usually affirms as well that the only form of existence is the
material universe and that the universe is merely the product of chance or
fate. See also agnosticism.
atonement, atonement theories. Atonement refers to God's act of dealing
with the primary human problem, sin. Both OT and NT affirm that sin has
broken the relationship between God and humankind. According to
Christian theology, God accomplished the way of restoration through
Christ's death. Although Scripture does not clearly spell out how this
atonement takes place, some of the atonement theories include: (1) *moral
influenceChrist's death acts as a positive example of love in action; (2)
*ransom (Cbristus victor)- Christ is the ransom that buys back sinners
from Satan or gains the victory over evil; (3) *satisfaction- Christ's death
appeased the honor due God that has been robbed by human sin; and (4)
*penal substitution- Christ stood in the legal place of sinners, bearing the
just punishment due us because we transgress God's laws.
attribute, attributes of God. In general, an attribute is a characteristic or
quality used to describe an object or person. When speaking of the
attributes of God, theologians note those characteristics or qualities that
are essential to our understanding of God as God relates to us as created
beings. The attributes that classical Christian theology sets forth include
*holiness, *eternal ity, *omniscience (all knowing), *omnipotence (all
powerful), *omnipresence (present to all) and goodness. Some theologians
would argue that love is an attribute of God, while others suggest that love
is more closely related to God's essential being.
Augsburg Confession. Formulated in 1530, the Augsburg Confession
summarizes the faith claims of Lutherans regarding Christ and his word.
The Confession was written by Philipp Mclanch- thon, a devoted follower
of Martin Luther. The Augsburg Confession has twenty-eight articles on
topics such as God, humanity, sin, *salvation, the church and the end of the
ages.
Augustine, Augustinianism (354-430). One of the greatest theologians in
the history of the church, Augustine was influential in the development of
the Western church's understanding of the doctrines of the *Trinity, sin,
*prcdestination and the church. Augustine is known for his integration of
the thought categories of Platonic philosophy with theology.
Augustinianism as a system of thought essentially starts with the complete
sinfulness of humankind (depravity), which leaves humans unable to
respond in faith toward God. In keeping with this, Augustinianism asserts
that God predestines those who are enabled to repent and believe.
axiology. An area of philosophical inquiry that studies the nature, criteria,
implications and applications of value judgments. Generally, axiology
asks, What is good (value theory)? What is right (*ethics)? and What is
beautiful (*aesthetics)?
B
baptism. The practice of sprinkling with, pouring on or immersing in
water as an act of Christian initiation and obedience to Christ's own
command. Baptism as a Christian *ordinance or *sacrament is nearly
universal in application throughout the Christian church, although there is
great diversity in whether it is applied solely to those who consciously
exercise faith in Christ (believer's baptism) or whether it is also to be
extended to the infants of Christian parents (infant baptism, or
*pedobaptism).
baptismal regeneration. The belief that water baptism effects the saving
work of the Holy Spirit in washing away original sin. In Roman
Catholicism baptism (usually of infants) is understood to confer grace
upon the individual, whether or not faith is present. In Lutheran theology
baptism must be accompanied by faith, whether the faith of the individual
or of the parents, to be effective in washing away sin. Other Protestants
reject baptismal regeneration, arguing that it contradicts the concept of
justification by grace through faith alone.
Barth, Karl (1886-1968). One of the most influential twentiethcentury
theologians, Karl Barth is often credited with being the father of *neo-
orthodoxy or *dialectical theology. Barth is known for three main
contributions. First, he emphasized the absolute *transcendence of God,
contrary to liberals who emphasized God's *immanence. Second, he
understood truth to arise out of the clash of opposing ideas-finite with
infinite, eternity with time, God with humans. Finally, he placed Christ at
the center of his theology, thus reversing the human-centered liberal
theology that preceded him.
Basil (the Great) of Caesarea (c. 330-379). Basil, bishop of Caesarea, was
one of three theologians known as the *Cappadocian fathers. Although
influential in the rise of communal monasticism based on obedience,
holiness and love, Basil is best remembered for his contribution to the
development of the orthodox doctrine of the *Trinity. In his defense of the
trinitarian faith, Basil introduced the formula for the Trinity as being one
substance (ousia) and three persons (hypostases).
believers' church. A theological conviction arising out of the *Radical
Reformation that emphasizes the church as comprising only those who
through faith in Jesus Christ voluntarily gather together for the sake
ofworship, instruction and doing good deeds. Contrary to the Augustinian
view, proponents of the believers' church reject any definition of the
church as a mixed body of believers and unbelievers. As a result, the
believers' churches tend to focus on the local congregation as the
community of those who are truly disciples of Jesus (the "gathered
church").
biblical criticism. The method or methods by which meanings of biblical
texts are sought through the application of techniques used in interpreting
various types of literature. These methods include textual criticism,
*redaction criticism, form criticism, *historical criticism, *genre
criticism, literary criticism and grammatical criticism.
biblical theology. Biblical theology is the discipline that attempts to
summarize and restate the teaching of a biblical text or of a biblical author
without imposing any modern categories of thought on the text. Rather,
the goal is to understand the "theology" of a biblical book or author in its
original historical context. Many theologians see the work of biblical
theology as logically prior to the task of *systematic theology, which
attempts to state the biblical teaching in ways that address contemporary
concerns.
biblical theology movement. Though biblical theology as a discipline
traces its roots to the work of Johann Philipp Gabler (1753-1826), the
biblical theology movement arose in the middle of the twentieth century
as biblical scholars attempted to grapple with the authority of the text as
well as to find an internal unity within the diversity of the biblical text.
Some in the movement saw the Bible as a human book that was to be
studied using methods common to the study of any other literature
(*historical-critical method), while others continued to uphold the divine
authority of Scripture and sought to understand the Bible as a theological
book. Although the heyday of the biblical theology movement is past, the
effects of the movement continue as a scholarly and pastoral discipline
that seeks to uncover the message of Scripture for today's audience.
bibliology. The topic in *systematic theology that deals with issues of the
nature and character of the Bible. Bibliology attempts to understand what
kind of book the Bible is, how it is authoritative for Christian faith and
practice, and to what extent and in what manner the Bible is to be
understood as divine revelation.
binitarianism. A theory that affirms that God is to be understood as two
persons sharing a single *essence or substance. Most binitarians affirm the
personality of God the Father and God the Son, but usually define the
Spirit of God as either a characteristic (or impersonal power) of the Father
or Son, or as the action of God the Father and God the Son toward
creation. See also trinitarianism.
blessed hope. The biblical phrase used to refer to the second coming of
Christ as the fulfillment of our longings (see Tit 2:13). The main
twentieth-century *evangelical-fundamentalist debate surrounding the
blessed hope is whether it will be a secret appearing only to Christians
prior to a period of great *tribulation (the *rapture anticipated by
dispensational pretribulational *premillennialism) or whether Christ's
appearance will be a public event observable by all people, whether
Christian or not (most other eschatological positions, including
*amillennialism, *postmillennialism and historic premillennialism).
Book of Common Prayer. The standard service and prayer book (*liturgy)
used by the Church of England and Anglican/Episcopal communions
throughout the world. The document was originally the work of Thomas
Cranmer but has seen numerous revisions since its first publication in
1549. See also Anglican, Anglicanism.
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich (1906-1945). A German theologian who became
involved in resistance to the Nazi government during World War II.
Bonhoeffer was eventually executed as a war criminal in a German
concentration camp. He is credited with several unique ideas that have
entered common theological consciousness. These include "cheap grace,"
"religionless Christianity" and "the world come of age." Unfortunately,
Bonhoeffer did not live long enough to complete his work, and thus there
is some debate over what he meant by such phrases.
Brunner, Emil (1889-1966). A highly influential Swiss theologian who,
along with Karl Barth, is associated with the movement called *neo-
orthodoxy or *dialectical theology. Brunner rejected liberal theology's
portrait of Jesus Christ as merely a highly respected human being. Instead
Brunner insisted that Jesus was God incarnate and central to *salvation.
Brunner also attempted to find a middle position within the ongoing
*Arminian and *Calvinist debate, stating that Christ stood between God's
sovereign approach to humankind and our free acceptance of God's gift of
salvation. Though Brunner rightly reemphasized the centrality of Christ,
conservative theologians have often been hesitant to accept Brunner's
other teachings, including his rejection of certain "miraculous" elements
of the Scriptures and his questioning of the usefulness of the doctrine of
the inspiration of Scripture.
Bultmann, Rudolf (1884-1976). As professor at the University of Marburg,
Germany, Bultmann was one of the most significant NT scholars of the
twentieth century. He was a pioneer of the form-critical (Formgeschichte)
approach to the Gospels, an approach that sought to discover the
underlying oral sayings and events in the early church that eventually led
to the actual text of the Gospels. He is also known for "demythologizing,"
that is, the attempt to identify the ancient "myths" assumed by the biblical
authors and to translate these into modern terms. For Bultmann, this meant
interpreting the NT using the categories developed by existentialist
philosopher Martin Heidegger. For example, Bultmann restated the
"primitive ideas" of sin as "inauthentic existence" and *salvation as
"authentic existence."
Byzantine. Having to do with the ancient Greek city of Byzantium
(renamed Constantinople in A.D. 330), which fell to invading Islamic
armies in 1453. Byzantine theology evidenced a distinctively Eastern
theological flavor. Byzantine theologians emphasized *salvation as
"deification" in contrast to the Western view of salvation as a judicial
transaction. Byzantine theology was also committed to reiterating the
traditions of the patristic thinkers. Increasingly, Byzantine theologians saw
themselves as maintaining the true faith in the face of the novel ideas of
the Western tradition.
C
call (general, special, effectual). The act by which God extends to humans
an invitation to enter into a saving relationship. The idea of a "general"
call arises from scriptural texts that suggest that God's invitation goes out
to all peoples through the testi mony of general revelation, that is, as
present in God's handiwork and providential care for creation. The
"special" call refers to the Spirit of God working specifically in the heart
of an individual as the preaching of the gospel provides the person with an
opportunity to exercise faith in Christ. Finally, the "effectual" call refers to
the Spirit's application of grace such that an individual receives
forgiveness of sin and eternal life (*salvation).
Calvinism, John Calvin. The theological system of thought stemming from
the work of one of the Reformation's greatest theologians and biblical
scholars, John Calvin (1509-1564). Central to Calvin's thought, especially
as seen in his Institutes of the Christian Religion, was the *sovereignty of
God. Calvinism became a historical development of Calvin's thought as
laid out in the Institutes. The *Synod of Dort (1618-1619) set forth what
has become the standard summary of the major tenets of Calvinism. These
arc captured in the acronym TULIP (total *depravity, unconditional
*election, *limited atonement,
*irresistible grace and the *perseverance of
the saints). See also Arminianism, Arminius.
canon. Literally meaning "standard" or "rule," the term is most closely
associated with the collection of books that the church has recognized as
the written Word of God (Scripture) and that functions as the rule or
standard of faith and practice in the church. Although the various Christian
traditions are not in full agreement as to which books should comprise the
collection of Scripture, at the very least all agree that the sixty-six books
of the Protestant Bible are canonical and therefore authoritative.
canonical criticism. An approach used 6o interpret the Bible in light of its
final form as a theologically unified collection of books rather than
seeking to understand the books in their precanonical form and function.
Two of the most significant pioneers of canonical criticism as a modern
interpretative approach are Brevard S. Childs and James Sanders. See also
biblical criticism; criticism.
Cappadocian fathers. A group of theologians writing between the *Council
of Nicaea (A.D. 325) and the *Council of Constantinople (A.D. 381). The
Cappadocian fathers responded to the Arian heresy and formulated the
orthodox doctrine of the *Trinity. The group included *Basil of Caesarea
(c. 330-379), *Gregory of Nyssa (c. 330-395) and *Gregory of Nazianzus
(c. 330-389). The Cappadocian fathers' trinitarian formula stated that God
is "three persons [hypostaseis] in one *essence [ousia]." See also
Arianism, Arius.
casuistry. The attempt to formulate universal ethical rules or standards that
can be applied in specific situations in order to ensure moral behavior.
Casuistry, in other words, is the attempt to make general rules that can
govern particular ethical issues.
catechesis, catechism. The process of teaching the basic Christian beliefs
and the contents of the Scriptures either to a child who is raised in the
church or to a new convert to Christianity. This process is often
accomplished through the use of a catechism, a popular manual that often
uses a question-and-answer format.
catholic. A term literally meaning "universal" or "worldwide." The word is
most often associated with Roman Catholicism but originally became
standardized in Christian theology through the formula appearing in early
Christian creeds that affirms belief in "one holy catholic and apostolic
church." To affirm the church's catholicity is to suggest that the church is
universal in scope. In other words, the church is not restricted to any one
ethnic group or geographical location but is open to Jew and Greek, slave
and free, male and female (Gal 3:28), with its gospel message being
directed to "all nations."
causality. A term derived from the closely related ideas of cause and
effect. In theology, causality as a method seeks to determine the nature and
attributes of God by seeking to identify and understand effects present in
the world that arc assumed to have been ultimately caused by God. In
short, the method of causality assumes that there are marks left in creation
that point to the ultimate cause, God as Creator.
Chalcedonian formula. The theological conclusion of the Ecumenical
Council held in Chalcedon (A.D.451), which attempted to delineate the
relationship between Christ's humanity and his deity. The church accepted
the Chalcedonian formula as the orthodox statement about the person of
Christ. This formula confesses "one and the same Christ, Son, Lord, Only-
begotten, made known in two natures without confusion, without change,
without division, without separation, the difference of the natures being by
no means removed because of the union [of the divine and the human]."
charismatic, charismatic movement. Charismatic literally means having to
do with the charismata, or "gifts," of the Holy Spirit as delineated in
several Pauline texts. In a general sense anyone who is part of the body of
Christ, the church, and who exercises any gift of the Spirit may be said to
be charismatic. However, in the mid-twentieth century a movement arose
that emphasized the practice of the "sign" gifts (such as speaking in
tongues, healing and miracles) and an emphasis on the "baptism of the
Spirit" as an experience subsequent to *conversion. Although the
charismatic movement began in a mainline Protestant context, it quickly
became an interdenominational phenomenon affecting nearly all branches
of Christianity, including Roman Catholicism and to a lesser extent
*Eastern Orthodoxy.
chiliasm. See millennium, millennialism.
Christ, Christology. The Greek word translated in English as "Christ" is the
equivalent of the Hebrew term Messiah and means "anointed one."
Although not intrinsic to its meaning, the NT use of the term Christ tends
to point to the deity of Jesus. Christology is the theological study devoted
to answering two main questions: Who is Jesus? (the question of his
identity) and What is the nature and significance of what Jesus
accomplished in the incarnation? (the question of his work).
Christocentrism. The intentional or unintentional situating of Jesus Christ
as the central or dominant theme of Christian theology. Christianity is
christocentric by its very definition: Christians are those who follow
Christ. However, Martin Luther, Karl Barth and Dietrich Bonhoeffer are
examples of theologians who intentionally sought to develop their
theology around Christ as either the starting point or the "standard" by
which other theological concepts are understood and evaluated. In a
negative sense, Christocentrism can lead to the neglect of the trinitarian
aspects of the Christian faith, thus ignoring or downplaying the role of the
Father and the Spirit.
church. A word generally used to translate the generic Greek word
ekklesia, which variously means "gathering," "assembly" or
"congregation." However, the NT tends to use the word to refer to all those
who by faith in the person and work of Christ as the fullest revelation of
God have entered into a new relationship with God and with one another (1
Cor 1:9-10), who are the dwelling place of the Holy Spirit on earth (1 Cor
3:16) and who have been given the task of proclaiming the present and
future reign of God in the world, both by the verbal declaration of the
word of God (Acts 20:25-27) and by the administration of the *ordinances
or *sacraments (Mt 28:19; 1 Cor 10:16-17). The church is founded on the
past work of Christ in his death, resurrection and ascension, points to the
return of Christ in the future and seeks to live in love by the power of the
Spirit in the present.
circumcision. The practice of cutting off the foreskin of the male sexual
organ. Originally, the practice was instituted by God (toward Abraham),
and it became the external act signifying entrance into the OT community
of faith. The Mosaic law prescribed that every Jewish male was to be
circumcised on the eighth day after birth. Circumcision was also
performed on Gentile proselytes (converts) to Judaism. According to the
NT, through Christ external physical circumcision has been superseded by
a spiritual "circumcision of the heart" (Rom 2:29).
circumincession. The theological concept, also referred to as perichoresis,
affirming that the divine *essence is shared by each of the three persons of
the *Trinity in a manner that avoids blurring the distinctions among them.
By extension, this idea suggests that any essential characteristic that
belongs to one of the three is shared by the others. Circumincession also
affirms that the action of one of the persons of the Trinity is also fully the
action of the other two persons.
clergy. Those persons who have been selected, set apart and acknowledged
by the church to proclaim the Word of God and to administer the
*ordinances or *sacraments. In certain Christian traditions such as Roman
Catholicism, *Eastern Orthodoxy and some Reformed circles, the clergy
hold a special authoritative status vis-a-vis nonclergy (*laity). In other
traditions, especially in the various *believers' churches, clergy are seen as
only functionally distinct from other Christians. That is, clergy carry out a
special function in the church but do not have a higher status of authority
than the laity.
coherence theory of truth. A theory of knowledge that asserts that a given
proposition or statement is true when it is consistent within a larger set of
propositions also taken to be true. If propositions come into conflict (are
contradictory), it is assumed that either one or both of the propositions is
false. The weakness of the coherence theory is that there can be no proof
of the "starting point" or the "first proposition" of a belief system; instead,
such a system of beliefs is usually accepted on the basis that it is self-
evidently true.
coinherence. See circumincession.
communicatio idiomatum, communicatio operationum. Communicatio
idiomatum is Latin for "communication of attributes." According to this
teaching, Jesus' status as both fully God and fully human implies that
whatever is true of Jesus' humanity is also true of his deity and vice versa
without mixing the qualities of the divine or human nature. For example,
if Jesus suffers and if Jesus is God, then it can be concluded that in Jesus
God suffers. Communicatio operationum (communication ofoperations)
suggests that any work or action of Christ's divine nature is at the same
time the work of his human nature and vice versa. In short, both of these
terms are meant to safeguard the fact that Jesus is only one person rather
than two, even though the one person is both human and divine. Thus
whatever Christ does is in fact the singular action of the one God-man.
communion. Generally, a term most closely related to the biblical idea of
fellowship (from Greek *koinania). It can refer to either the relational
fellowship persons may have with God or the fellowship persons have with
one another, especially with those who are in Christ. The term is also used
in reference to the *Lord's Supper as an event marking the fellowship of
the participants with Christ and with each other.
compatibilism. The theory that human free will is consistent (compatible)
with God's sovereign prerogative to determine or will all things that are to
happen. In order for this to be true, compatibilists usually argue that
human freedom is only analogous to God's freedom and not identical with
it. More specifically, human freedom is limited, whereas God's freedom is
absolute.
concomitance. In Roman Catholic theology, the belief that Christ is
physically present in the eucharistic elements of bread (which is his body)
and wine (which is his blood). The doctrine of concomitance was
eventually used to prevent the *laity from partaking of the wine in case it
should be accidentally spilled, thus desecrating Christ himself.
concupiscence. A word that describes the fallen human tendency or strong
desire toward engaging in sin. Concupiscence does not imply that humans
will always fall into sin but simply that humans will desire sin even if they
choose not to engage in it.
concurrence (concursus divinus). A term referring to any theory that
attempts to define the relationship between the divine sovereignty of God
and the free actions and responsibilities of created human beings. In
particular, concurrence traditionally refers to the idea that God concurs
with human wills in the acts that humans do.
conditional immortality. The belief that the human soul's eternal existence
is dependent on God's gracious act of sustaining it. Those who hold to
conditional *immortality suggest that the human soul is given eternal life
only as a gift and that those who do not receive the gift of eternal life (the
unsaved) will cease to exist sometime after death, either immediately or at
the final judgment. See also annihilationism.
confession, confessionalism. A biblical concept related to the Greek
homologeb, which means "to say the same thing" or "to agree," confession
is used in a least three senses: (1) to acknowledge the greatness of God in
praise and worship, (2) to acknowledge and repudiate sin, and (3) to
verbalize basic doctrinal commitments. It is in this third sense of the term
that confessions of faith-that is, doctrinal summaries of essential Christian
beliefs-have been developed throughout the history of the Chris tian
church. Confessionalism is the practice of doing theology within the
context of a particular confession of faith, which is usually
denominationally specific.
confirmation. According to Roman Catholicism and *Eastern Orthodoxy,
confirmation is one of the *sacraments of the church and is administered
by a clergyperson to children prior to receiving their first communion at
about age twelve. This act gives a special grace to the child, enabling
growth in faith. In certain Protestant traditions where infant (see
pedobaptism) baptism is practiced, confirmation is a rite administered to
children, usually around age thirteen, to allow them to formally affirm the
baptism they received as infants.
congregationalism. A system of church government that assumes that
Christ's authority comes directly to the local congregation. As a result,
decisions in matters of faith and practice arise primarily if not solely out
of the local congregation's corporate reading of Scripture. Today most
congregationalism is "democratic" in the sense that the will of the
majority of the people in the congregation constitutes what the local
church believes and practices, and determines who should serve as its
leaders.
consubstantiation. The theory of the *Lord's Supper most closely
associated with the *Lutheran tradition. Martin Luther taught that the body
and blood of the Lord is present "in, with and under" the actual bread and
wine. This was in contrast to the Roman Catholic teaching of
*transubstantiation, which taught that the bread and wine were
transformed into the real body and blood of Jesus upon their consecration
by the presiding priest.
consummation. Generally refers to either the completion of an era of
God's working in history or the absolute completion of history (the final
consummation). Most theologians see Christ's second coming as a definite
act of consummation, whether that consummation entails the
establishment of an earthly millennial kingdom (as in *premillennialism)
or the completion of history itself (as in *postmillennialism and
*amillennialism).
contextualization. The process of seeking to communicate the message
and teachings of the ancient Scriptures using contemporary forms of
language as well as metaphors and images that are familiar to the current
audience. Contextualization raises the question as to how far a theologian
may go in altering the language of Scripture without losing the *essence of
the gospel message. Contextualization is also an attempt to understand
ways in which the Christian community lives out the gospel in the midst
of a non-Christian culture.
contingency. In philosophy, any event or object that is dependent on
another event or object for it to happen or exist. This is in contrast to a
necessary event or object, which happens or exists independently of other
events and objects. For example, many philosophers argue that every
object and event in creation is contingent, in contrast to God, who is a
necessary being because by definition God is eternal and therefore must
exist.
conversion. A general term referring to an individual's initial encounter
with God in Christ resulting in the reception of God's gracious provision
of *salvation. Some of the changes brought about in conversion include a
change in heart from being dead in sin to being alive in Christ
(*regeneration, Jn 1:12-13), a change in status from being guilty before
God to being not guilty (*justification, Rom 3:21-31), a change in
relationship from being an outcast and enemy to being a child and friend
of God (*adoption and *reconciliation, 1 Jn 3:1; Col 1:20). Conversion
begins the journey of discipleship through which a person who once was a
slave to sin is being freed by the Holy Spirit for holiness (*sanctification).
coredemptrix. In contemporary Roman Catholic theology, the idea that
Mary the mother of Jesus uniquely participated in the provision of
*redemption, because she obediently became the mother of Christ in his
incarnation and cosuffered in his passion by co-offering Christ to the
Father as a redemptive sacrifice. Catholic theologians who argue for Mary
as corcdemptrix are usually careful to note that this status does not make
Mary equal to Christ; yet they do suggest that redemption was
accomplished by Christ with the free participation of Mary.
correspondence theory of truth. A theory of knowledge that asserts that a
proposition is true when it corresponds to or harmonizes with an external
reality "as it really is." One of the weaknesses of correspondence theory is
that it is difficult to mediate between two or more differing conceptions of
observed reality. In addition, it casts human knowledge in the form of
measurable, observable qualities that supposedly inhere in the world.
cosmological argument. Any argument that attempts to demonstrate the
existence of God by appeal to observation of the world (Greek kosmos), its
objects and its processes. For example, Thomas *Aquinas argued that
everything that moves points to something else moving it. Hence for every
movement there must be a prior mover. Aquinas asserted that tracing this
causal chain leads eventually to a First Mover that is unmoved. This
Unmoved Mover, Aquinas concluded, is God.
cosmology. Derived from the Greek word kosmos (world), cosmology
refers to the attempt to understand the origin, nature and subsequent
history of the universe. Cosmology is an area where theology and science
intersect, insofar as both are interested in understanding whether or not
there is a first cause to the universe and whether or not there is purposeful
direction and design in the universe.
Councils of Nicaea, Constantinople, Chalcedon. In several *ecumenical
(i.e., including representation from all parts of the church) gatherings in
the early centuries of the Christian history, church leaders discussed major
theological issues for the purpose of coming to consensus on what the
faithful should believe. The Council of Nicaea (A.D. 325) met primarily to
resolve the debate over *Arianism (the doctrinal teaching that Christ was
the highest created being) and concluded with the formulation of the anti-
Arian *Nicene Creed. The Council of Constantinople (A.D. 381) extended
the discussion to the identification of the Spirit within the Godhead,
making the Creed fully trinitarian. Constantinople expanded the Nicene
Creed and officially condemned Arianism as well as several other
teachings, and it solidified the orthodox doctrine of the full humanity of
Jesus Christ. The Council of Chalcedon (A.D. 451) focused on the
relationship of Christ's humanity to his divinity and issued the formula of
Chalcedon, which became the orthodox statement on the person of Christ.
See also Chalcedonian formula.
Council of Trent (1545-1563). A theological council held by the Roman
Catholic Church to respond to the challenges put forward by the theology
of Martin Luther and other Protestant Reformers. The Council of Trent,
which spanned the office of five popes, attempted to counter the Protestant
doctrines of *justification, the *sacraments and Scripture.
covenant, covenant theology. Covenant refers to the act of God in freely
establishing a mutually binding relationship with humankind. Through the
covenant God bestows blessings on humans in conditional and
unconditional terms. Conditionally, God blesses humans as they obey the
terms of the covenant. Unconditionally, God bestows blessings on humans
regardless of their obedience or disobedience to the terms of the covenant.
God made covenants with Noah, Abraham, Moses and David. But above
all, God has fulfilled these covenants and has inaugurated the New
Covenant in Christ, which is for all people who trust in him (Heb 9:15, 27-
28). Covenant theology is the system of theology that centers on God as a
covenant-making God and sees in the history of creation two great
covenants: the covenant of works and the covenant of grace. Covenant
theology asserts that prior to the *Fall God made a covenant of works with
Adam as the representative of all humankind. In response to Adam's
disobedience God established a new covenant through the second Adam,
Jesus Christ. Those who place their faith in Christ come under the benefits
of this new covenant of grace. See also federal theology.
creatvo cx nihilo. A Latin phrase that literally means "creation out of
nothing." *Augustine is credited with developing the argument that God
created the world without any preexisting materials. This was in contrast
to most Greek philosophers, who understood the creative act as God's
ordering of eternally existing materials into the present world or universe.
The value of the doctrine of crcatio ex nihilo is that it maintains a clear
distinction between God and the created order and also maintains that God
alone has eternal status.
creation. Christian theology views creation (entailing everything that
exists other than God) as a result of God's spoken word. The Christian
doctrine of creation affirms that God is not to be equated with the universe
(*pantheism), nor does God become inseparably bound to it
(*panentheism). Instead, God remains completely distinct from the
universe (*transcendence) while at the same time being intimately
involved with it (*immanence). A biblical view of creation includes both
the physical realm (the realm of objects, animals and people) and the
spiritual realm (angels and demons).
creationism. In Christian anthropology, *crcationism refers to the theory
that God creates a person's soul directly. This is in contrast to the position
that views the soul as eternally existing with God and also in contrast to
*traducianism, which suggests that both the body and the soul are derived
from one's parents. Creationism (or creation science) can also refer to a
theory of the creation of the universe as having been accomplished in a
literal seven-day week as recorded in the first chapters of Genesis. Many
contemporary proponents of creation science also argue for a relatively
young earth (usually younger than 50,000 years, or even under 10,000
years).
credo ut intelligam, credo quia absurdum. Credo ut intelligam translates
literally,
"I believe in order that I might understand." The phrase comes
from *Anselm in his work Proslogion I and indicates his understanding of
the relationship of faith to reason, namely, that faith is logically and
chronologically prior to understanding and that it is through faith that
understanding comes. Credo quia absurdum translates "I believe because it
is absurd" and is credited to *Tertullian. For Tertullian, faith and reason
arc incompatible, and therefore faith entails belief in the unbelievable or
the absurd.
creed. Derived from the Latin credo (I believe), a creed is a summary
statement of Christian faith and belief. The purpose of the earliest creeds
was to present a short summary of Christian doctrine, which baptismal
candidates affirmed at their baptism. Later, creeds become tools for
instruction of new converts, for combating heresy and for use in corporate
worship. Three of the most famous creeds established in the first five
centuries of church history are the Apostles' Creed, the *Nicene (or Niceno
Constantinopolitan) Creed and the Athanasian Creed.
criticism (biblical, canonical, form, redaction). A term used in reference to
any method of interpreting texts that uses modern scientific insights into
the nature of history, language, culture and literature. More specifically,
*biblical criticism is the attempt to interpret the Scriptures by uncovering
the original meaning of the text, looking to the original historical setting
in which it was written without reference to later theological traditions. In
contrast, *canonical criticism is the attempt to interpret the Bible in light
of the final form of Scripture as a theologically unified collection of books
rather than seeking to understand the books in their precanonical form and
function. Form criticism (Form- geschichte) is the attempt to go back to
the original sources lying behind the text prior to its written form, such as
by uncovering oral traditions and layers of material added to the scriptural
say-ings in the process of oral tradition. *Redaction criticism is the
attempt to identify the ways in which the writer or editor (e.g., Gospel
writer) utilized sources in composing a biblical book in order to
understand the author's theology and setting.
D
damnation. As a synonym for the final *judgment, damnation refers to the
eternal condemnation of God on those who, because of their sinfulness,
will not enter God's eternal kingdom but will suffer the eternal
consequences of separation from God. Scripture also acknowledges that
Satan and his rebellious demonic followers will suffer damnation for their
acts of unrighteousness.
Day of the Lord. A biblical phrase prevalent among OT prophets who
pointed to a future event or era (not necessarily a single twenty-four-hour
day) during which God would visit *judgment on Israel or the world. The
NT authors interpreted the phrase in a futuristic sense but saw in Jesus
Christ the beginning of the fulfillment of the Day of the Lord. For
believers in Christ the Day of the Lord is an anticipation of hope; for
unbelievers it holds only judgment leading to *damnation.
deacon, deaconess. Derived from the Greek diakoneo (to serve), deacons
(male and female) and deaconesses (female only) were appointed in the
early church as servants of God's people. Their original purpose, as seen in
Acts 6, seems to have been to care for those Christians who were in
physical need, thus freeing the apostles to minister the Word and to devote
themselves to prayer. The apostle Paul later points out that deacons and
deaconesses must demonstrate high standards of morality, even as they
carry out their practical and often low-profile deeds of service.
death. Viewed theologically, death refers to the destructive consequences
of the entrance of sin into humankind. This consequence is spiritual
alienation or separation from God. As a result of sin humans also
experience physical death, a visible and universal reminder of the ongoing
effects of sin. Scripture also points to a "second death" (Rev 2:11; 20:6,
14; 21:8): the final separation of the wicked from God's glorious presence
for all eternity.
death of God movement. A theological movement popularized by
Protestant theologians Thomas J. J. Altizer, William Hamilton and Paul
van Buren in the 1960s, which declared that the traditional concept of God
had ceased to play any significant role in the life of modern people. The
movement was highly publicized by popular media but had a relatively
short lifespan.
deconstruction. A term used primarily in *hermeneutics (the art and
science of interpreting written texts or spoken language) to describe the
process of analyzing a particular representation of reality so as to offer a
critique of how a text "constructs" a picture of reality. Although
deconstructionists are not always explicitly negative in practice, they often
use deconstruction as a technique to discredit a text to which they are
philosophically or ideologically opposed. Deconstruction, which is
sometimes known as poststructuralism, arose out of, and in response to, a
theory of literature called *structuralism, which sought to analyze the
common structures that characterize various texts or literary works.
decree. Most simply, any command or order given by a human ruler for the
sake of carrying out the task of governing or leading. From a theological
perspective God's decrees are God's eternal, all-encompassing plans for
creation. After the *Reformation certain *Calvinist theologians engaged in
debates over the logical order of God's eternal decrees. The four decrees
usually discussed included the decree to create, the decree to allow the
*Fall into sin, the decree to *elect those who would receive *salvation and
the decree to *damn the nonelect. See also sublapsarianism,
infralapsarianism; supralapsarianism.
deification. In early non-Christian religions, the elevation of a human ruler
to the status of deity. However, in *Eastern Orthodox theology deification
is used to characterize *salvation, as suggested by 2 Peter 1:2-4. *Eastern
Orthodoxy is careful to distinguish between the deification of the believer
(as a "partaker" or "sharer" in the divine nature) and the deity of Christ (as
actually being divine) as two qualitatively different categories.
deism. The belief that understands God as distant, in that God created the
universe but then left it to run its course on its own, following certain
"laws of nature" that God had built into the universe. An analogy often
used to illustrate the deist view is that of an artisan who creates a
mechanical clock, winds it up and then leaves the clock alone to "run out."
Deism became popular in the early modern era and was prevalent among
several. of the founding fathers of the United States of America, including
George Washington, Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson.
demon. Derived from the Greek terms daimon and daimonion, demons are
created spiritual beings who, along with Satan, are in rebellion against the
good purposes of God. These "unclean spirits" seek to oppose, afflict and
deceive Christians and nonChristians alike and to incite humans to rebel
against God and God's good purposes for humankind and creation.
demythologizing. The term used by Rudolf *Bultmann to describe his
approach to interpreting the Scriptures. Bultmann believed that the
modern mind cannot accept the ancient worldview of the Bible, which
included belief in demons, heaven, hell and miracles. Therefore, the task
of interpretation is to identify the ancient "*myths" (symbols) found in the
text and replace them with modern equivalents (which are also myths in
Bultmann's definition). In this sense, Bultmann's demythologizing was not
so much directed against myths themselves as against using outdated
myths.
denomination, denominationalism. An organizational structure of several
congregations who unite together on the basis of common doctrinal,
organizational, ethnic, geographical or practical considerations even while
meeting in separate localized situations. Denominationalism as a theory
understands the church as consisting of a diversity of practices and beliefs
under the umbrella of the larger term Christian while at the same time
denying that any one Christian group can claim to be the exclusive
manifestation of the church on earth. This is in contrast to *sectarianism
(see sect, sectarianism) which refers to the attitude in which a narrowly
defined group sees itself as the only true manifestation of the church to the
exclusion of all other groups.
deposit of faith. The sum total of the teaching of the prophets and apostles
about the way of *salvation through Jesus Christ, which has been written
down in Scripture and is to be faithfully interpreted by the church and its
teachers through the help of the Holy Spirit.
depravity, total depravity. Depravity refers both to the damaged
relationship between God and humans and to the corruption of human
nature such that there is within every human an ongoing tendency toward
sin. Total depravity refers to the extent and comprehensiveness of the
effects of sin on all humans such that all are unable to do anything to
obtain *salvation. Total depravity, therefore, does not mean that humans
are thoroughly sinful but rather that they are totally incapable of saving
themselves. The term suggests as well that the effects of the *Fall extend
to every dimension of human existence, so that we dare not trust any
ability (such as reason) that we remain capable of exercising in our fallen
state.
descent into hades (hell). The belief confessed in later versions of the
Apostles' Creed that at some point between Christ's death and
*resurrection, he visited the abode of those already dead (Greek hades or
Hebrew sheaf) either to proclaim the *salvation he had accomplished on
the cross or, in some interpretations, to proclaim victory over Satan.
Although there is some scriptural merit to the idea of Christ's descent into
hades (Eph 4:9-10; 1 Pet 3:19-20) as a literal event, it has not been
universally recognized in the church and instead has often been understood
symbolically as representing the full extent of Christ's suffering on behalf
of sinners-past, present and future.
determinism. Any theory that sees all events, including human behavior,
as the necessary result of prior causes. Naturalistic determinism sees all
events as part of an inflexible and unalterable chain of cause and effect in
the physical universe. Theological determinism sees all events as being
directly caused by God. Many theologians (although there are notable
exceptions) reject both naturalistic and theological determinism because
both theories seem to contradict the possibility of human freedom of
choice, which in their view leaves humans morally not responsible for
their actions.
dens absconditus, deus revelatus. Literally,
"the hidden God" and "the
revealed God," respectively. The phrases, originally used together by
Martin Luther, speak of the paradoxical situation of a hidden God
revealing himself and a revealed God hiding himself. For Luther the
unknowable God is revealed in Christ; yet in the cross of Christ, God's true
glory is hidden to human wisdom.
deus ex machina. Latin for "a god from a machine," the deus ex machina
was a dramatic device used in ancient Greek and Roman drama whereby a
"god" would be unexpectedly introduced into a play to provide a solution
to an otherwise unsolvable problem. In the history of theology some
theologians have been accused of introducing a "god of the gaps," or a
deus ex machina, as a solution to a theological, philosophical or scientific
problem where a more "rational" or "natural" solution may be possible.
For example, some critics suggest that the Christian doctrine of God as
Creator is a deus ex machina in that it posits God as the ultimate source of
the universe rather than explaining the origin of the universe through a
more "natural" or "scientific" theory. See also Occam's razor.
dialectical theology. A synonym for *neo-orthodoxy, dialectical theology
is the general designation given to the theological contributions of several
twentieth-century theologians, including Karl *Barth, Emil *Brunner and
Rudolf *Bultmann. More specifically, dialectical theology refers to Karl
Barth's focus on the qualitative difference between God and humans and
the interplay (dialectic) between opposing or paradoxical ideas, such as
time and eternity or finite and infinite.
dialogical personalism. The term used to refer to Martin Buber's attempt
to distinguish between two types of relationships: the I-Thou relationship
and the I-It relationship. The I-Thou relationship is characterized by
mutuality between persons in ongoing conversation; in the I-It relationship
a single person acts as the knowing subject and the It stands as the object
to be known. For Buber true knowledge of God is a dialogical I-Thou
relationship; that is, God is not an object to be studied but an active
subject who comes into mutual and reciprocal relationship and
conversation with humans.
diaspora. A Greek term originally meaning "the dispersed or scattered
ones." The word was applied to individual Jews or communities of Jews
who were scattered or mixed among the Gentile world. In NT usage the
term is also used of Christians who were dispersed among the world, that
is, in a context that is not their true "home" (see 1 Pet 1:1).
dichotomy, dichotomist. Literally, a dichotomy is a division of items into
two mutually exclusive categories. Though there are several ways that
dichotomy is used in theology (such as the distinction between God and
humans, and between time and eternity), it often refers to the theory that
humans arc composed of two distinct components: body and soul. When
applied to a theory of what constitutes reality (*metaphysics), theological
dichotomists assert that reality is divided into two realms: the material
(which is physical and concrete) and the immaterial (which is spiritual and
abstract).
dispensationalism. A system of theology popularized mainly in twentieth-
century North America, especially through the influence of the Scofield
Reference Bible. The dispensationalism delineated by Scofield suggested
that God works with humans in distinct ways (dispensations) through
history; that God has a distinct plan for Israel over against the church; that
the Bible, especially predictive prophecy, needs to be interpreted literally;
that the church will be secretly *raptured from earth seven years prior to
Christ's second coming; and that Christ will rule with Israel during a
literal thousand-year earthly reign. Contemporary, or progressive,
dispensationalism remains thoroughly *premillennial but rejects the
*ontological distinction between Israel and the church as two peoples of
God, seeing them instead as two salvation-historical embodiments of a
single people.
docetism. In the early church, the teaching that Jesus was fully God but
only appeared to be human (taken from the Greek dokea,
"to seem or
appear"). Docetist theologians emphasized the qualitative difference
between God and humans and therefore downplayed the human elements
of Jesus' life in favor of those that pointed to his deity. The early church
rejected docetism as an heretical interpretation of the biblical teaching
about Jesus.
doctrine. A theological formulation that attempts to provide a summary
statement of the teaching of Scripture on a particular theological topic.
Ideally, doctrine is formed by attempting to be faithful to Scripture while
giving attention to the traditions of the church and the thought patterns of
the day. Thus doctrine is stated in such a way that contemporary people
can understand the teaching of the ancient Scriptures.
documentary hypothesis. Also known as the JEDP theory, the documentary
hypothesis arose out of the work of nineteenth-century OT scholars K Graf
and J. Wellhausen. They suggested that the Pentateuch (the first five books
of the OT) was actually a compilation of the work ofat least four separate
sources, designated as the J (Jehovah) source, the E (Elohim) source, the D
(Deuteronomist) source and the P (Priestly) source. The hypothesis stirred
great controversy among conservative scholars who generally accepted
Moses as the sole author of the Pentateuch.
dogma, dogmatics. In *Protestant circles *dogma is nearly synonymous to
*doctrine, that is, a theological teaching. In Roman Catholic and *Eastern
Orthodox circles dogmas arc the officially accepted teaching of the church
and not simply the theories of individual theologians. The term doematics
gencrally refers to the churchly task of summarizing and systematizing the
teaching of Scripture and tradition into a coherent whole according to the
theological categories (such as *anthropology, *Christology, *soteriology)
traditionally used throughout much of the history of the church.
dominical saying. Literally a "saying of the Lord" (Lord in Latin =
dominos), it is a synonymous term in Gospel studies for a "saying of
Jesus."
Donatism. During the fourth and fifth centuries AD, a movement arising
out of the initial teaching of Donatus sought to separate the "pure" church
from the "apostate," or "fallen," church. The Donatists vigorously opposed
Christian involvement in the military because the military was seen an
instrument of the evil state. Donatists also urged that Christians be
rebaptized if they had been baptized by a bishop who had cooperated with
the pagan emperor. *Augustine eventually refuted the Donatist arguments.
dualism. Generally, any system of thought that attempts to define the
nature of something as being composed of two distinct realities,
substances or principles. In describing the nature of reality dualists usually
posit a distinction between the physical and the spiritual (see Augustine)
or between the invisible and the visible (see Plato). When describing the
body, dualists (such as Rene Descartes) may distinguish between body and
soul or between matter and mind. Other dualists may posit the existence of
two opposing realities of good and evil (such as in *Gnosticism or
*Manichaeanism).
Duns Scotus, Scotism (c. 1266-1308). A medieval Franciscan monk,
philosopher and theologian who generally opposed the teaching of Thomas
*Aquinas. Scotus argued that faith is more a matter of exercise of will
than of reason. As a result, Scotism is the assertion that when the
conclusions of philosophy (reason) come into conflict with the
conclusions of theology (faith), the conclusions of faith must be accepted.
Eventually the name Duns (dunce) became a term of ridicule, especially
by certain Protestant Reformers, for those who believed without reason.
E
Eastern Orthodoxy. A branch of Christianity that is committed to
preserving the doctrines formulated by the early church fathers as outlined
in the seven ecumenical councils of the fourth through the eighth
centuries. Although sharing certain theological commitments with Roman
Catholicism and *Protestantism (such as the doctrine of the *Trinity),
Eastern Orthodoxy is characterized by at least three major distinctives: (1)
*apophatic theology, which suggests that because God is beyond rational
understanding, a person can only know God as an "inner vision of light";
(2) the trinitarian understanding of the Spirit proceeding from the Father
alone (as in the original wording of the *Nicene Creed) and not also from
the Son (as in the Western version of the Creed); and (3) *salvation as a
process of *deification, that is, of participating in the divine nature. See
also filioque.
Ebionism. The teaching of an early group ofJewish-Christian sects that
were committed to an *ascetic or poor lifestyle (from Hebrew
`
ebonim,
"poor"). Ebionites rejected the Pauline epistles, concentrated on the theme
of doing good works according to the book of James, saw the Christian life
as strict obedience to a moral code and understood Jesus as one who was
anointed by God at his baptism because of his perfect obedience to the
Mosaic law. Although Ebionism was not officially condemned by the
church, it never gained widespread acceptance.
ecclesiology. The area of theological study concerned with understanding
the church (derived from the Greek word ekklesia,
"church"). Ecclesiology
seeks to set forth the nature and function of the church. It also investigates
issues such as the mission, ministry and structure of the church, as well as
its role in the overall plan of God.
economic Trinity. Refers to the manifestations of the three persons of the
*Trinity in relationship to the world, particularly in regard to the
outworking of God's plan (economy) of *salvation. Thus the economic
Trinity refers to how God as a tripersonal being relates to the world, which
in turn provides the biblical context for understanding how the persons of
the Trinity relate to each other (*immanent Trinity). One of the most
important contemporary theological questions surrounding the Trinity
asks: Is there a difference between "God in relationship to the world"
(economic Trinity) and "God in internal eternal relationship" (immanent
Trinity)?
ecumenism, ecumenical movement. From the Greek word oik- oumene,
"the entire inhabited earth." Ecumenism is the attempt to seek a worldwide
unity and cooperation among all churches that confess Jesus Christ as
Lord. Ecumenism recognizes the unfortunate effect of many schisms in
church history, the most major being the division between Eastern and
Western churches in 1054 and between Protestants and Roman Catholics
during the *Reformation in the sixteenth century. In the early twentieth
century various international missionary conferences explored the need for
Christian unity if world evangelization were to be accomplished. This
gave birth to the modern ecumenical movement. Positively, the
ecumenical movement reaffirmed the need for all branches of Christianity
to see their common roots and to seek unity where possible. Negatively,
the ecumenical movement has often focused on political ideology;
consequently, sectors of the Christian church have been hesitant to join in
ecumenical dialog.
Edwards, Jonathan (1703-1758). One of the greatest American theologians
and pastors, Edwards ministered as a Massachusetts Congregational pastor
and was intimately involved with the first Great Awakening. Edwards is
recognized for his efforts to give a theological explanation of that
movement and for giving shape to *Calvinism in eighteenth-century North
America.
efficacy, efficacious. A term that describes the ability of something to
fulfill the purpose for which it is made or given. The term usually is used
in reference to the purposes and grace of God. God's grace, then, is
efficacious inasmuch as it is able to bring about *salvation in those to
whom it is directed. Thus efficacious grace is the only grace capable of
completely bringing about the salvation of the human being and can be
offered only by God.
election. A biblical word used to speak of God's choosing of individuals or
people to bring about God's good purposes. In general terms election can
refer to God's choosing of persons for a type of service, while in a more
particular sense election refers to God's choosing of persons to inherit
*salvation through Jesus Christ. The doctrine of election has been the
subject of intense debate, particularly between *Calvinist and *Arminian
theologians, since the *Reformation era. Other theologians (e.g., Karl
*Barth) try to avoid the Calvinist-Arminian debate by suggesting that
God's election is first and foremost an election of Christ rather than the
election of individuals to salvation.
elements. Refers to the physical symbols used in the *ordinances or
*sacraments of the church, especially the *Lord's Supper. Hence the bread
and the wine are the "elements" of the Lord's Supper, or *Eucharist. In
particular, theologians over the centuries have debated whether Christ is in
some way present in the elements, and if so, in what way-physically or
spiritually? This debate arises particularly out of an examination of
Christ's own words at the Last Supper,
"This [bread] is my body" (Lk
22:19; see 1 Cor 11:24). See also consubstantiation; transubstantiation.
emanation. A term meaning literally "a flowing down from." The term
arose out of ancient Greek philosophies that understood creation to be an
overflow of the fullness of God rather than something created by God out
of nothing (ex nihilo). The idea of creation as an emanation of God was
used by certain medieval philosophers and theologians to suggest that
creation is really a hierarchy of order flowing down from God through the
spiritual world of angels, the material world of humans and animals, and
finally to the world of physical objects. See also creatio ex nihilo.
empiricism. A philosophical theory that assumes that all knowledge is
gained through either internal experience (thoughts, emotions, etc.) or
external experience (sight, smell, touch, hearing and taste). Empiricism is
most closely associated with individuals such as Francis Bacon and John
Locke, but the purest form of empiricism is found in the thought of David
Hume. Hume took empiricism to its extreme, stating that a person can not
really know if external things (objects) exist because all one can know for
certain is one's own experience of those things.
Enlightenment, the. A term used to refer primarily to the philo sophical
mood among seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Western intellectuals.
During the eighteenth century the philosopher Immanuel *Kant defined
the Enlightenment as "mankind's coming of age." Enlightenment thinkers
rejected external authorities as a source of knowledge and instead elevated
human reasoning as the best way to bring about an understanding of the
world. As a result, the Enlightenment era brought with it a suspicion of the
claims to authority of the Bible, the church, the *creeds and any religious
*dogmas or doctrines.
episcopacy, episcopal. A form of church government in which the chief
oversight of the church is entrusted to bishops, while presbyters, *deacons
or priests minister more specifically within local congregations. Episcopal
government is hierarchical, with a college of bishops or a head bishop
exercising highest authority. Roman Catholic, *Eastern Orthodox and
*Anglican churches represent major forms of episcopacy. The head bishop
of the Roman Catholic Church is the pope of Rome; of the Eastern
Orthodox Church, the patriarchate of Constantinople; and of the Anglican
Church, the group of bishops headed by the archbishop of Canterbury.
epistemology. Philosophical inquiry into the nature, sources, limits and
methods of gaining knowledge. In Western philosophy, epistemology has
generally followed two main alternatives: rationalism (knowledge is
gained through the mind's use of reason and logic) and *empiricism
(knowledge is gained through the gathering of information through the use
of the inner and external senses).
equivocal. In semantics (the study of the meanings of words) the term is
used to identify words that have more than one possible meaning. This is
in contrast to *univocal words, which have only one possible meaning. In
theology a term is said to be equivocal if it means something quite
different when used of God than when referring to humans or something
else in creation.
Erasmus, Desiderius (c. 1466-1536). A major figure of the Reformation
period, Erasmus, a Christian *humanist, sought to bring about reforms in
the church through a return to scholarly study of both the Scriptures and
the texts of the Greek and Latin and Latin classical tradition. One of
Erasmus's major undertakings was the production of a Greek New
Testament. Erasmus is significant in that he provided the tools that
Reformers such as Luther and Calvin used in their efforts to interpret the
NT on the basis of the Greek text and to carry on their theological work.
eschaton, eschatology (consistent [thoroughgoing], realized, inaugurated).
Derived from the Greek term meaning "last," eschaton refers to the
ultimate climax or end of history wherein Christ returns to earth to
establish his eternal kingdom of righteousness and justice among all
nations. Eschatology, then, is the theological study that seeks to
understand the ultimate direction or purpose of history as it moves toward
the future, both from an individual perspective (What happens when a
person dies?) and from a corporate perspective (Where is history going,
and how will it end?). In the twentieth century at least three basic forms of
eschatology have developed. Consistent, or thoroughgoing, eschatology is
the view that the teaching of Jesus and the apostles is thoroughly
concerned with proclaiming the imminent end of history. Realized
eschatology views the first coming of Jesus Christ itself as the full
presence of the kingdom of God. Inaugurated eschatology sees the first
coming of Christ as the beginning of the kingdom in the present, while
acknowledging that the consummation or fulfillment of the kingdom of
God is yet to come.
essence, essentia. Deriving from the Latin verb esse, literally "to be,"
essence is the fundamental nature of something apart from which the thing
would not be what it is. Essence, then, is the core ofwhat makes something
what it is without being something else. The Latin term essentia became
important in reference to the nature of God, especially in the discussion
surrounding the *Trinity, where each person-Father, Son and Holy Spirit-is
said to share the same essentia.
eternal generation of the Son. A phrase used to describe the relationship
that exists between the first and second persons of the *Trinity. God the
Father is said to generate (or "beget") the Son eternally. In other words, the
Son's identity as Son is defined eternally by his relationship to the Father.
Likewise, the Father is eternally the Father by his relationship to the Son.
The "generation" of the Son is not to be confused with physical conception
or birth, whereby a human father begets a son who did not previously
exist. In other words, the eternal generation of the Son does not speak
about the origin of the Son but rather seeks to define the relationship of
the Son to the Father.
eternity, eternality. In the absolute sense, eternity is the realm in which
there is no beginning and no end. As a term relative to the concept of time,
eternity is what lies beyond time and is not constrained by time. Eternality,
then, is the characteristic or attribute associated with God alone, because
God has no beginning point and no ending point. Eternality applies only to
God in another way as well: only God is uncaused.
ethics. The area of philosophical and theological inquiry into what
constitutes right and wrong, that is, morality, as well as what is the good
and the good life. Ethics seeks to provide insight, principles or even a
system of guidance in the quest of the good life or in acting rightly in
either general or specific situations of life. Broadly speaking, ethical
systems are either deontological (seeking to guide behavior through
establishment or discovery of what is intrinsically right and wrong) or
*teleological (seeking to guide behavior through an understanding of the
outcomes or ends that ethical decisions and behavior bring about).
Eucharist. From the Greek word eucharista (I give thanks), the term has
been used in the Christian tradition to refer to one of the central rites of
the church, namely, the ongoing commemoration of the last supper that
Christ had with his disciples before his crucifixion or the commemoration
of the crucifixion itself. As such, the Eucharist is a celebration of
thanksgiving to God for the redemptive work of Christ. The term Eucharist
(or Mass) has generally been used in Roman Catholic and Anglican
traditions, while Protestant traditions generally prefer to speak of the
celebration as the Lord's *Supper, *Communion or "the breaking of
bread."
evangelical, evangelicalism, neo-evangelicalism. A set of terms arising
out of the Greek word euangelion, "good news," or "gospel." In its most
general sense evangelical means being characterized by a concern for the
essential core of the Christian message, which proclaims the possibility of
*salvation through the person and work of Jesus Christ. More specifically,
evangelicalism has been used to refer to the transdenominational and
international movement that emphasizes the need to experience personal
*conversion through belief in Christ and his work on the cross, and a
commitment to the authority of Scripture as the infallible guide for
Christian faith and practice. Neo-evangelicalism is the classification given
particularly to a movement of North American Christians that arose
initially in the 1940s. Nco-evan- gelicals were initially interested in
proclaiming not only the personal but also the social dimensions of the
gospel, such as the need to work for justice for those who are socially
oppressed as well as to offer care and relief to those who suffer physically.
evidentialism. A method of defending the Christian faith (*apologetics)
that assumes that data drawn from history and experience (facts) can
demonstrate the reasonableness of Christian claims and can therefore help
to prepare a person for faith in Christ by removing obstacles to belief.
Thus evidentialism attempts to give as much "evidence" as possible to
substantiate crucial facts of the Christian faith such as the resurrection of
Christ or the historical accuracy of the biblical accounts.
evil. Any act or event that is contrary to the good and holy purposes of
God. Theologians generally distinguish between moral and natural evil.
Moral evil refers to acts (sins) of creatures that are contrary to God's holy
character and law. Natural evils include harmful or destructive events in
nature that occur throughout the course of history and that negatively
affect creaturely life (e.g., earthquakes and famines). Some theologians
(e.g., *Augustine) emphasize that evil does not have independent existence
as a "thing" but is either the moral evaluation of acts or the ultimate
consequence or effect of such evil acts on creation.
ex opere operato, ex opere operantis. Two Latin phrases employed
particularly in reference to the debate over the effectiveness of the
*sacraments. Ex opere operato literally means "from the work done" and
suggests that a sacrament is effective in fulfilling its purpose. This
effectiveness is not dependent on the faith of the recipient of the grace that
comes through the act. In addition, the concept may suggest that the
sacrament is effective even if it is administered by a sinful person or
perhaps even by a person who is not properly *ordained by the church. Ex
opere operantis literally means "from the work of the one doing the work"
and suggests that the sacrament is effective only if administered rightly by
a duly ordained priest or minister of the church.
exclusivism. Any theory that argues that *salvation is found only in and
through Jesus Christ to the exclusion of all other religions or beliefs.
Exclusivism also generally argues that Christ must be believed upon and
explicitly *confessed in order for a person to qualify for salvation. As a
consequence, exclusivists tend to reject the possibility of salvation for
those who have never heard the gospel of Jesus Christ. See also
inclusivism.
exegesis, eiegesis. Literally,
"drawing meaning out of" and "reading
meaning into," respectively. Exegesis is the process of seeking to
understand what a text means or communicates on its own. Eisegesis is
generally a derogatory term used to designate the practice of imposing a
preconceived or foreign meaning onto a text, even if that meaning could
not have been originally intended at the time of its writing.
exemplarism. The belief that Jesus' life and ministry is primarily an
example to humans of how to live uprightly before God rather than a
means of providing something that humans cannot gain on their own.
Many opponents of exemplarism argue that the theory assumes that
humans in their sinful condition have the ability to conform to the
character and life of Jesus.
existentialism. Any philosophical system that attempts to define what it
means to be human in terms of "existence" (How does a human live?)
rather than in terms of "*essence" (What is a human?) Existentialists
generally agree that there is no essence common to humankind but that
persons are all uniquely defined by their free decisions and acts. As a
result, existentialists tend to elevate personal freedom and emphasize the
need to "make" life meaningful rather than seeking to "find" the meaning
of life.
expiation. The belief that sin is canceled out by being covered over. For
Christians, expiation suggests that Christ's death covers our sins. Biblical
scholars debate whether the Greek terms deriving from hilaskomai should
be translated as "*propitiation," denoting the turning away of divine wrath,
or, in contrast, as "expiation," denoting the sense of covering sins or
canceling a debt. Hilaskomai is also sometimes translated simply as
"mercy seat."
extra nos. Literally,
"outside of ourselves." The Latin term is often used in
reference to the location or source of *salvation as being completely
external to the human being. In other words, to suggest that salvation is
extra nos is to deny that salvation occurs on the basis of anything inherent
in humans, whether a human act of the will or a human thought. Instead,
salvation extra nos affirms that salvation is completely an act of God; that
is, God freely and sovereignly bestows salvation upon a person.
F
faith. A biblical word that refers both to intellectual belief and to
relational trust or commitment. The biblical authors generally do not make
a distinction between faith as belief and faith as trust, but tend to see true
faith as consisting of both what is believed (e.g., that God exists, that Jesus
is Lord) and the personal commitment to a person who is trustworthy,
reliable and able to save (that is, trust in the person of Christ as the way to
*salvation). See also assensus; fiducia; notitia.
Fall. The event in which Adam and Eve, the first humans, disobeyed the
explicit command of God, thereby bringing sin and death onto the human
race. As a consequence of the Fall humans have become alienated from
God, from one another and from the created order.
federal theology, federal headship. A theological system of thought
identified with the work of Johannes Cocceius (16031669) and often called
*covenant theology. Federal theology suggests that as the first human,
Adam acted as the "federal head" (from Latin foedus,
"covenant") or legal
representative of the rest of humankind. Thus God entered into a
covenantal relationship with Adam that promised blessing for obedience
and a curse for disobedience. According to federal theology, if Adam had
been obedient to God, his obedience would have meant blessing for all
humans. But because Adam was disobedient, the curse extends to
humankind, of which Adam is the covenantal representative. Federal
theology adds that just as Adam was the federal head of humanity, so also
Christ enters history as a second Adam, free from the curse, and acts as the
covenantal head of righteousness for all those who believe in him.
feminism. Any movement that attempts to emphasize or recover female
perspectives on reality and the world. In theology and biblical studies,
feminism in its broadest sense has sought to show both God's feminine
characteristics and how Scripture has often been interpreted with male
biases and assumptions. In its most radical forms, theological feminism
argues that God should be addressed with feminine titles (such as Goddess
or Mother) and that many parts of the Bible, especially the OT, are at best
patriarchal (and thus irrelevant) or at worst antiwoman (and thus
oppressive to women). In more moderate forms, feminism seeks to
provide feminine language and perspectives in theological reflection on
God, while not abandoning the traditional titles of Father, Son and Spirit
in reference to the *Trinity.
fideism. The view that matters of religious and theological truth must be
accepted by faith apart from the exercise of reason. In its extreme, fideism
suggests that the use of reason is misleading. Less extreme fideists suggest
that reason is not so much misleading as it is simply unable to lead to
truths about the nature of God and *salvation.
fides qua creditur, fides quae creditur. Literally,
"the faith by which (it) is
believed" and "the faith which is believed," respectively. The terms refer
to two aspects of Christian faith: the internal and the external. The fides
qua creditur is the means by which God's self-revelation is received (that
is, the exercise of trust in God as an internal attitude), while fides quae
creditur is the actual content or composition of what is revealed by God
(that is, the intellectual acceptance of certain statements about God). Fides
qua creditur speaks to the question of how one believes in God; ftdesquae
crediturspeaks to the question of what one believes about God.
fides quaerens intellectum. Literally,
"faith seeking understanding." The
phrase originated with *Anselm in his Proslogion and was used to show
the relationship of religious faith to human reason. For Anselm, matters of
religion and theology are understood only by first believing them and then
proceeding to gain an intellectual understanding of the things already
believed. In other words, faith is both logically and chronologically prior
to reason.
fiducia. Literally,
"trust." In Latin fiducia refers to the essential nature of
faith (Latin, fides); that is, to exercise *faith is to engage in trust or
commitment. Although related, fiducia is distinguished from *assensus,
which refers to intellectual acceptance of certain propositions or truths.
Biblical faith affirms the importance of both fiducia and assensus. See
also notitia.
filioque. A Latin term literally meaning "and the Son," filioque became
significant because of its addition to the description of the Holy Spirit in
the Niceno-Constantinopolitan *Creed (A.D. 381) by the Western (Latin)
churches in the sixth century. Originally the Creed stated that the Holy
Spirit proceeds from the Father, but the addition of filioque suggested that
the Holy Spirit proceeds from both the Father "and the Son." The addition
of the filioque clause without the consensus of the Eastern churches
ignited a great controversy and became a major factor in the subsequent
split between the Eastern and Western churches in A.D.1054.
Five Ways, the. The five rational arguments that Thomas *Aquinas saw as
pointing to the existence of God. The five arguments are (1) the argument
from motion (all things in motion need a mover, but there must be
something unmoved that begins other things in motion; God is this
Unmoved Mover); (2) the *cosmological argument (all effects must have
causes, but there cannot be an infinite series of causes into the past; thus
God is the first or Uncaused Cause); (3) the argument from * contingency
(all things exist in dependence on something else, that is, contingent;
therefore there must be something that is absolutely independent, that is,
necessary; this necessary being is God); (4) the argument from perfection
(there appears to be an increasing degree of perfection among things;
therefore there must be a being who is the height of perfection; this Being
is God); and (5) the *teleological argument (the observable design in the
world suggests that there must be an intelligent designer-God).
foreknowledge. A biblical term (from Greek prognosis) that literally
means "to know in advance." Some theologians view foreknowledge as
referring to God's selective choice of individuals or groups of people with
whom to enter into a loving relationship. Foreknowledge understood in
this sense is more than simply knowing events in advance of their
happening (although this may be included) because the Scriptures seem to
use the term in a more relational than chronological sense. Thus the
foreknowledge of God involves God's favorable disposition to certain
people, even before they existed.
foundationalism. A term referring to any theory of knowledge that looks
for a starting point or "foundation" on which to build knowledge. This
foundation may take the form of an indisputable proposition or set of
propositions on which knowledge can be constructed through the use of
logical reasoning from the first propositions. Historically, Rene Descartes
is credited with being one of the greatest foundationalist philosophers.
Descartes begins his whole system of knowledge by affirming the now-
famous dictum cogito ergo sum (I think, therefore I am). Alternatively,
some foundationalists (e.g., Friedrich *Schleiermacher) have sought to
construct knowledge on the basis of some supposedly universal human
experience.
free churches, free church movement. Terms used to designate those
churches or *denominations that have deliberately separated themselves
from the influence, support or control of the state or government. The free
church movement arose primarily as a reaction to the Roman Catholicism
of the Middle Ages and later to the *Calvinist and Lutheran churches,
which maintained a close connection with the state.
free will. The belief that human behavior is self-caused. The idea of free
will assumes that there are no external causes sufficient to explain why a
person acts as he or she does. Actions, according to free-will theory, are
ultimately chosen, even if the person choosing knows that the chosen
action may bring about undesirable consequences.
free will theism. A late-twentieth-century theological development in the
doctrine of God that seeks to steer a middle path between a "classical"
view of God as largely unaffected by human creatures and a "process"
view that understands God to be integrally involved and constantly
changing with creation. Instead free will theism asserts that God enters
into a "give-andtake" relationship with humanity and freely risks his
sovereignty by giving humans a substantial measure of freedom. Arguably
the main thinker behind the "free will theism" idea is the Canadian
theologian Clark H. Pinnock. See also process theology.
fundamentalism, fundamentalist-modernist debate. A movement in North
America during the early part of the twentieth century that attempted to
maintain a firm commitment to certain "fundamentals" of the Christian
faith. Fundamentalism was a direct reaction to the increasing influence of
"*liberal" or "*modernist" forms of Christianity that were becoming
increasingly popular within American Protestant seminaries and churches.
The fundamentalist-modernist debate pitted modernists, who tended to
reject the supernatural elements of the biblical witness, against
fundamentalists, who emphasized the historicity of the miraculous events
recorded in Scripture, including the *virgin birth and the *resurrection, as
well as belief in the second coming of Christ.
G
general revelation. A term used to declare that God reveals something
about the divine nature through the created order. This self-revealing of
God through creation is called general because it only gives "general" or
"indirect" information about God, including the fact of God's existence
and that God is powerful. This is in contrast to special revelation, which is
more "specific" and "direct," and includes the appearance of the living
Word (Jesus Christ himself) and the written Word of God (the Scriptures),
revealing a holy, loving and just God who graciously provides forgiveness
of sin. General revelation is likewise "general" in that it is available to all
humankind, in contrast to the divine self-disclosure that God revealed to
certain persons. See also special revelation.
genre. A term that refers to different types or varieties of literature or
media. In the interpretation of texts, particularly the Bible, most exegetes
agree that identifying the genre of the text to be interpreted is crucial and
that the text must be understood in light of the common conventions that
typified that genre at the time of its writing. Thus, poetry is not to be
interpreted in the same manner as historical narrative, nor is prophecy
properly read in the same manner as an epistle (letter).
glorification. The last stage in the process of *salvation, namely, the
*resurrection of the body at the second coming of Jesus Christ and the
entrance into the eternal *kingdom of God. In glorification believers attain
complete conformity to the image and likeness of the glorified Christ and
are freed from both physical and spiritual defect. Glorification ensures
that believers will never again experience bodily decay, death or illness,
and will never again struggle with sin.
glory. A biblical term used in reference to the unapproachable and mighty
manifestation of the immediate presence of God. The biblical concept of
glory carries with it connotations ofinexpress- ible beauty and majesty. At
the same time it implies an absolutely pure and terrifying "holiness"
confronting the sinfulness of humans. In the NT, Christ is said to be the
glory of God, although a glory that is at least partially veiled from sight,
except for those who exercise faith in Christ. Christ's glory is especially a
consequence of his *resurrection from the dead and his *ascension to the
right hand of the Father.
glossolalia. A compound Greek word meaning "to speak in tongues" (from
laleo, "to speak" and glossa,
"tongue"). Glosso lalia, the supernatural
ability to speak in languages not previously learned, is first recorded in
Scripture as happening on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2). The apostle Paul
later makes reference to glossolalia as a special gift of the Spirit given to
some Christians and to be practiced for the edification of the church.
Throughout church history there has been ongoing debate as to whether
genuine glossolalia ceased after the passing of the apostles or if it is a
legitimate gift to be practiced today.
Gnosticism. An early Greek religious movement of broad proportions that
was particularly influential in the second-century church. Many biblical
interpreters see in certain NT documents (such as 1 John) the attempt to
answer or refute Gnostic teaching. The word gnosticism comes from the
Greek term gnosis, meaning "knowledge." Gnostics believed that devotees
had gained a special kind of spiritual enlightenment, through which they
had attained a secret or higher level of knowledge not accessible to the
uninitiated. Gnostics also tended to emphasize the spiritual realm over the
material, often claiming that the material realm is evil and hence to be
escaped.
grace (conunon, efficacious, prevenient). One of the central concepts of
the Scriptures, grace speaks of God's loving actions toward creation and
toward humankind in particular. Grace is the generous overflow of the love
of God the Father toward the Son, Jesus Christ. This love is most clcarly
demonstrated to humans through God's selfless giving of Jesus to enable
people to enter into a loving relationship with God as the Holy Spirit
enables them. Common grace speaks of God's extension of favor to all
people through providential care, regardless of whether or not they
acknowledge and love God. *Effecaciousgrace refers to the special
application of grace to a person who comes by faith to Christ for
*salvation. It is the special act of God that brings about the true salvation
of a person. *Prevenientgrace, though often thought to be synonymous
with common grace, refers more specifically to the Wesleyan idea that
God has enabled all people everywhere to respond favorably to the gospel
if they so choose.
Gregory of Nazianzus (c. A.D. 329-389), Gregory of Nyssa (c. A.D. 335-
395). Two early church theologians who together with *Basil the Great are
known as the *Cappadocian fathers. Both were influential in the
development of the orthodox statement of the doctrine of the *Trinity.
Gregory of Nazianzus was significant in identifying distinctive terms to
describe each of the persons of the Godhead: the Father is unbegotten, the
Son is eternally begotten and the Spirit proceeds. Gregory of Nyssa
contributed to trinitarian doctrine by working through the details of Basil's
distinction between the one ousia ("substance" or "*essence") of God and
the three trinitarian hypostaseis ("persons") of God.
H
hamartology. The term used to refer to the theological investigation of sin
(from Greek hamartia,
"sin"). Hamartology concerns itself with
understanding the origin, nature, extent and consequences of sin.
Furthermore, hamartology seeks to understand how sin is transmitted
throughout the human race and how sin opposes God's purposes for
creation.
Harnack, Adolf von (1851-1930). A German theologian and church
historian whose major contributions were in NT studies and patristics (the
study of the thought and writings of the early church Fathers). One of
Harnack's central arguments was that the development of doctrine, or
*dogma, in the early church led away from the original teachings of Jesus
and his disciples. Harnack argued, therefore, that the task of the theologian
and church historian is to strip away the "husk" of cultural and historical
developments of doctrine and get back to the original "kernel" of the
gospel found in Jesus. For Harnack, this kernel was Jesus' announcement
of the *kingdom of God. This kingdom is based in the Fatherhood of God
and the kinship of humankind, and it is fulfilled by Christians through the
exercise of higher righteousness (love).
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-1831). German philosopher and
theologian who argued that "mind" or "spirit" (German Geist) is the only
thing that is ultimately real and that everything else is a byproduct of
"mind." Creation, then, is essentially the product of the divine mind. As a
result, Hegel argued, to know how history unfolds is to understand the
workings of the divine mind. Contradictions in history, whether
contradictions of logic or contradictions involved in two nations standing
in opposition to one another in war, always lead to a higher understanding
or synthesis that transcends both sides.
Heidelberg Catechism. A confession of faith written by the theology
faculty of Heidelberg University at the request of Frederick III, a prince of
Germany in the sixteenth century. The Catechism served to instruct young
people in the essentials of the faith and was used to prepare them for
*confirmation. One unique feature of the Catechism is its ability to
combine Reformed and Lutheran perspectives into a single document.
Heilsgeschichte (salvation history). A German term meaning "history of
salvation." Originally coined by Johann Albrecht Bengel (1687-1752), the
term was used to describe the nature of the Bible as an account of God's
working out divine *salvation in human history. Proponents of this
approach rejected the idea that the Bible is a collection of divine "proof
texts" for constructing doctrine in favor of seeing it as the history of God's
redemptive plan. In the middle of the twentieth century many theologians
adopted elements of the Heilsgeschichte approach to biblical
interpretation (e.g., Oscar Cullmann, Gerhard von Rad), although there
were some notable exceptions (e.g., Rudolf *Bultmann).
heresy. Any teaching rejected by the Christian community as contrary to
Scripture and hence to *orthodox doctrine. Most of the teachings that have
been declared heretical have to do with either the nature of God or the
person of Jesus Christ. The term heresy is not generally used to
characterize non-Christian belief. That is to say, systems of belief such as
*atheism or *agnosticism, or non-Christian religions such as Buddhism or
Islam arc not technically heresy. The term heresy is generally reserved for
any belief that claims to be Christian and scriptural but has been rejected
by the church as sub-Christian or antiscriptural.
hermeneutic of suspicion. A phrase first used by the French philosopher
Paul Ricoeur to refer to the interpretative practice of coming to a text with
questions or "suspicions" about its truthfulness or veracity. Conversely, a
hermeneutic of suspicion allows the text to call into question the reader's
assumptions and worldview.
hermeneutics. The discipline that studies the principles and theories of
how texts ought to be interpreted, particularly sacred texts such as the
Scriptures. Hermeneutics also concerns itself with understanding the
unique roles and relationships between the author, the text and the original
or subsequent readers.
historical criticism. An approach to biblical interpretation that seeks to
understand the Bible in light of its historical and cultural backgrounds,
that is, as a book arising out of a human context. Historical criticism uses
a variety of methods to determine what actually happened in history
"before," "behind" or "under" the text rather than seeking a "divine"
meaning in the text itself. Although helpful to an extent, the primary
criticism leveled against historical criticism is that it tends to downplay
Scripture as a divine book and instead overemphasizes its humanness.
historical Jesus. A reference to the person of Jesus as he can be understood
and investigated using the tools and methods of modern approaches to the
study of history. The "historical Jesus" is often contrasted with "the Christ
of faith," that is, the Jesus that is honored and preached about by the
Christian church. In using these terms, it is often assumed that there is a
gap between what can really be known about the historical person, that is,
Jesus as he actually existed, and the Jesus proclaimed by the apostles as
recorded in the NT documents.
historical theology. The division of the theological discipline that seeks to
understand and delineate how the church interpreted Scripture and
developed doctrine throughout its history, from the time of the apostles to
the present day. The twofold function of historical theology is to show the
origin and development of beliefs held in the present day and to help
contemporary theologians identify theological errors of the past that
should be avoided in the present.
historicism. A term used to describe one of two types of theories of
history. In the first type, historicism is the theory that all things can be
best understood as the result of historical development; that is, a thing is
what it is because of its history. In the second type, historicism is the
belief that history progresses through unstoppable forces and that
historians can predict future historical outcomes on the basis of observed
patterns in the past.
Holiness Movement. A movement among certain Protestant churches
during the mid-1800s following in the tradition of John *Wesley. These
churches emphasized Wesley's doctrine of "entire *sanctification," that is,
that a Christian's life of purity takes place in two stages: through initial
sanctification at *conversion and through a second event of sanctification
later in the Christian's life (often called "the second blessing" or "entire
sanctification") during which the Christian is freed from the bonds of the
sinful nature, even though the believer continues to live in an imperfect
body and an imperfect world.
holy. A biblical term generally meaning "to be set apart." The term is used
widely in Scripture to refer to a variety of people and objects alike but
ultimately points to God as the one who is qualitatively different or set
apart from creation. Holy may also be used to describe someone or
something that God has "set apart" for special purposes. In the NT holiness
takes on the sense of ethical purity or freedom from sin. The fullness of
the biblical witness, then, testifies to God's holiness, understood as God's
"otherness" and "purity," as well as to God's prerogative to set people and
things apart for God's own purposes, together with the resulting godliness
in the lives of those whom God declares to be holy.
homiletics. The theological discipline that seeks to understand the purpose
and process of preparing and delivering sermons. Homiletics seeks to
integrate an understanding of the place of the preacher, the sermon and the
audience. Homiletics also seeks to help preachers to prepare themselves
spiritually for preaching, to develop sermons that are faithful to Scripture
and to present the sermon in culturally relevant ways.
homoiousios, homoousios. Two Greek terms used in the third and fourth
centuries in the debate surrounding the relationship of Jesus the Son to
God the Father. Homoiousios (literally,
"of similar substance") was used
by Semi-Arians to argue that the Son was of similar but not identical
substance as God the Father. Homoousios (literally,
"same in substance")
was used by *Athanasius and others to argue that the Son derives his
substance from the Father and hence shares the same substance as the
Father. Homoousios eventually became accepted as *orthodox teaching.
hope. A biblical term (Greek elpis) referring to the expectation of the
believer that God will fulfill promises made in the past. Biblical hope is
more than a simple wish; it entails certainty based on God's demonstration
of faithfulness to people in the history of *salvation as recorded in the
Scriptures and as experienced by the church. Ultimately the Christian's
future hope lies in the promise of Christ's return and the anticipation of
*resurrection from the dead. See also blessed hope.
humanism (secular humanism). In general, humanism is any movement or
ideology that focuses on the worth of the human being. Christian
humanism emphasizes the fact that humans are created in God's image and
as such are creatures of worth or value. Secular humanism, on the other
hand, attempts to see the worth of humans apart from any appeal to God.
Thus humanists often suggest that value is completely intrinsic to the
individual.
humiliation of Christ. A phrase used to speak of Jesus' voluntary giving up
of his *glory as the Son of the Father in being born as a human, suffering
and dying for the sake of humankind. Theologians have debated as to
whether Christ's humiliation includes a descent into hell after his death,
but most are in agreement that Jesus' life and death serve as the ultimate
example of self-sacrifice for the sake of others.
hypostasis, hypostatic union. Hypostasis is a Greek noun first used by
Eastern theologians in the early centuries of church history to refer to the
three persons of the *Trinity. The *Cappadocian fathers, *Basil in
particular, argued that God is three hypostaseis in one *ousia ("*essence,"
or "substance"). Although helpful, the term also led to confusion. Western
theologians described God as one *substantia in three personae, with
confusion arising out of the fact that substantia was the Latin equivalent to
hypostasis. Technically, hypostasis refers to each of the three concrete and
distinct trinitarian persons who share a single divine nature or essence.
The hypostatic union, in contrast, is an important christological
designation. At the *Council of Chalcedon in AD.451 the church declared
the doctrine of the hypostatic union. The doctrine is an attempt to describe
the miraculous bringing together of humanity and divinity in the same
person, Jesus Christ, such that he is both fully divine and fully human.
I
iconoclasm. Literally,
"destruction of images." Historically, iconoclasm
arose in the eighth century as the practice of destroying images (icons) of
Jesus Christ often found in the gathering places of certain Christian
churches. Many Christians worshiped the icons as representations of Jesus
Christ in his physical incarnation. The iconoclastic controversy began in
A.D. 725 when Emperor Leo III decided to have icons destroyed because
he thought icon worship was idolatrous and a hindrance to the conversion
of Jews and Muslims.
idealism. Any philosophical system that describes the nature of reality
more in terms of spirit or mind than matter or material. Some idealists
argue that all reality is the product of a single mind (or Geist), namely, the
mind of God (*Hegelian idealism), while others suggest that reality is the
sum total of many minds (Berkeleian idealism). Still others see reality as a
hierarchy and deem the abstract realm of thoughts and ideas to be "more
real" than the "less real" concrete realm of physical objects and shadows
of objects (*Platonic idealism).
illumination. The ongoing work of the Holy Spirit in the Christian person
and community in assisting believers to interpret, understand and obey the
Scriptures. Illumination is a matter of faith as well as intellectual assent-
the Spirit's goal in illumination moves beyond mere intellectual assent to
propositions of Scripture to the moving of the human will to trust Christ
and obey him.
imago Dei (image of God). A term describing the uniqueness of humans as
God's creatures. In the Genesis creation account Adam and Eve are said to
be created in God's image and likeness (Gen 1:26-27). Theologians differ
on what the image of God actually refers to, but most agree that the image
is not primarily physical. Instead the imago Dei may include the presence
of will, emotions and reason; the ability to think and act creatively; or the
ability to interact socially with others. Scripture attributes the imago Dei
solely to humans, and it indicates that the image is in some sense still
present even after the *Fall (see Jas 3:9). Above all, however, Christ-and
by extension those who are in Christis the image of God.
immaculate conception. The Roman Catholic teaching that Mary the
mother of Jesus was supernaturally prevented from being tainted by
original sin so that she could give birth to Jesus as God's own Son. The
teaching was first suggested by the theologian *Duns Scotus in the
thirteenth century and declared to be official Roman Catholic *dogma
(authoritative teaching) by Pope Pius IX in 1854.
immanence. The idea that God is present in, close to and involved with
creation. Unlike *pantheism, which teaches that God and the world are one
or that God is the "soul" (animating principle) of the world, Christian
theology teaches that God is constantly involved with creation without
actually becoming exhausted by creation or ceasing to be divine in any
way. See also transcendence.
immanent Trinity. The term used to explore and, to an inadequate degree,
explain the internal workings and relationships among the three persons of
the *Trinity. Statements about the immanent Trinity seek to give language
to the inexpressible mystery of what God is like apart from reference to
God's dealings with creation. Thus the immanent Trinity is Godas-God-is
throughout eternity. The Scriptures suggest that Jesus and the Father are
one (Jn 10:30) and that the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of God and of Christ (1
Cor 2:10; 3:17-18). The Scriptures also suggest that love is the *essence of
the immanent Trinity (see Jn 17:23-26; 1 Jn 4:8, 16). See also economic
trinity.
imminence. A term usually referring to the possibility of Christ's second
coming occurring at any moment. The imminence of Christ's return
suggests that no established intervening events need to take place before
his return, thus ruling out all predictions that would set the time or date of
his coming. Some contemporary theologians reinterpret imminence to
mean that Christ's return is near in the sense that it is the next major event
in God's timetable for history.
immortality. Most simply, the inability to cease to exist or the ability to
exist eternally. In this sense God is the only being who is truly immortal,
because God has always existed and will not cease to exist. Some
theologians argue, however, that human souls are created by God as
intrinsically immortal, whereas others argue that the soul only becomes
extrinsically immortal upon the reception of "eternal life" through
*salvation. Either way, it is commonly agreed that all humans, whether
righteous or wicked, arc subject to physical death as a consequence of sin
and thus are universally mortal as to their earthly life. Whatever
*immortality humans possess is due to the will and power of God.
immutability. The characteristic of not experiencing change or
development. Certain understandings of God posit the divine reality as
incapable of experiencing change in any way. Some theologians, however,
assert that this concept owes more to Greek philosophical influence than
to explicit biblical teaching. Many contemporary theologians distinguish
between God's eternally unchanging, faithful character and God's ability to
respond in different ways to changing human beings in their temporal,
earthly situation.
impassibility (apatheia). The characteristic, usually associated with God,
of being unaffected by earthly, temporal circumstances, particularly the
experience of suffering and its effects. Many contemporary theologians
reject the idea of divine impassibility, suggesting that it reflects Greek
philosophical, rather than biblical, concerns. However, the Bible clearly
teaches that God cannot be swayed in any way to be unfaithful to what
God has promised. Still, it is seemingly impossible to associate pure
impassibility with God in light of the fact that Jesus Christ, as the fullest
manifestation of God, experienced suffering on the cross.
impeccability. The characteristic of being unable to sin or being
completely free from sin. Although true of the triune God, impeccability is
more often specifically attributed to Jesus Christ in his earthly life and
ministry. Although Jesus was fully human and therefore subject to the
pressures of temptation as is any other human, Jesus is said to have been
impeccable either because he was also fully God or because he resisted
temptation.
imputation. A transfer of benefit or harm from one individual to another.
In theology imputation may be used negatively to refer to the transfer of
the sin and guilt of Adam to the rest of humankind. Positively, imputation
refers to the righteousness of Christ being transferred to those who believe
on him for *salvation.
incarnation. Fundamentally, incarnation is a theological assertion that in
Jesus the eternal Word of God appeared in human form (Jn 1). Many
theologians picture the incarnation as the voluntary and humble act of the
second person of the *Trinity, God the Son, in taking upon himself full
humanity and living a truly human life. The *orthodox doctrine of the
incarnation asserts that in taking humanity upon himself, Christ did not
experience a loss of his divine nature in any way but continued to be fully
God. See also hypostasis, hypostatic union.
inclusivism. A theory of *salvation that suggests that although God saves
people only on the merits of Christ, not all who arc saved have consciously
known of Jesus or heard the gospel. God saves those who, although they
have not heard of Jesus, nevertheless respond to the best of their
knowledge to the revelation of God available to them. This view stands in
contrast to both *exdusivism, which suggests that God saves only those
who consciously respond to the presentation of the gospel of Jesus Christ,
and to *pluralism, which sees saving value in non-Christian religions.
individualism. A mindset of modern Western culture that emphasizes that
meaning in life is found in a person's ability to think and make choices for
her- or himself. In its radical form individualism defines a person as the
sum total of her or his own preferences, thoughts and emotions without
reference to any external relationships. In Western Christianity
individualism predominated in the modern era and has had the unfortunate
effect of making Christianity primarily a transaction between an
individual and God, generally without sufficient emphasis on the
believer's relationship with and responsibility to the larger faith
community of the church.
indulgences. A practice of the medieval Roman Catholic Church that
suggested that financial contributions to the church could ensure that a
person who had died could be released from *purgatory (the place of
torment) into heavenly bliss. Indulgences, among other practices,
prompted Martin Luther to question the scriptural basis for many
teachings of the medieval Roman Catholic Church. This in turn led to the
Protestant *Reformation and Luther's emphasis on a person being declared
righteous on the basis of faith in Christ alone without reference to
meritorious human works of any kind.
inerrancy. The idea that Scripture is completely free from error. It is
generally agreed by all theologians who use the term that inerrancy at least
refers to the trustworthy and authoritative nature of Scripture as God's
Word, which informs humankind of the need for and the way to *salvation.
Some theologians, however, affirm that the Bible is also completely
accurate in whatever it teaches about other subjects, such as science and
history.
infallibility. The characteristic of being incapable of failing to accomplish
a predetermined purpose. In Protestant theology infallibility is usually
associated with Scripture. The Bible will not fail in its ultimate purpose of
revealing God and the way of *salvation to humans. In Roman Catholic
theology infallibility is also extended to the teaching of the church
("*magisterium" or "*dogma") under the authority of the pope as the chief
teacher and earthly head of the body of Christ.
infralapsarian. See sublapsarianism, infralapsarianism.
inspiration. A term used by many theologians to designate the work of the
Holy Spirit in enabling the human authors of the Bible to record what God
desired to have written in the Scriptures. Theories explaining how God
"superintended" the process of Scripture formation vary from dictation
(the human authors wrote as secretaries, recording word for word what
God said) to ecstatic writing (the human authors wrote at the peak of their
human creativity). Most *evangelical theories of inspiration maintain that
the Holy Spirit divinely guided the writing of Scripture, while at the same
time allowing elements of the authors' culture and historical context to
come through, at least in matters of style, grammar and choice of words.
intermediate state. The situation of those people who have died and who
now await the future *resurrection. Major theories about the intermediate
state proposed in the history of Christian theology include "soul sleep"
(dead persons, whether believers or not, are completely unconscious);
"restful bliss or conscious torment" (dead believers consciously
experience the loving presence of Christ, while dead unbelievers
consciously experience torment); and *purgatory (the Roman Catholic
belief that dead persons experience degrees of suffering in order to purge
them of their earthly sin). Some theologians deny the existence of an
intermediate state, suggesting instead that those who die are ushered
directly into eternity.
internal testimony of the Spirit (testimonium Spiritus sancti internum).
The working of the Holy Spirit in bringing about human confidence in the
truthfulness of Scripture regarding God's promises of *salvation to all who
exercise faith in Christ. The Word and the Spirit work together as a single
testimony but in two manifestations: internally and externally. As the
Scriptures are read, testifying to the work of Christ in bringing about
salvation to those who believe (external), the Holy Spirit works within the
believer to give a spiritual sense of the reality of faith (internal). The
doctrine of the internal testimony has its origins in *Augustine and was
especially affirmed by Protestant theologians during and after the
*Reformation.
intuitionism. The philosophical theory that knowledge is gained partially,
if not exclusively, by a direct mental awareness that does not come
through any external senses. Thus intuitionism suggests that knowledge is
not the result of observation by the sight, smell, touch, hearing or taste
(*empiricism), nor is knowledge the result of using logical processes of
the mind (rationalism). Rather knowledge comes to the mind directly and
apart from human rational and observational powers.
invisible church. A designation, dating perhaps to *Augustine, referring to
the sum total of all genuine believers who have been united by the Holy
Spirit into the body of Christ, whether living or dead. Unlike the *visible
church, which is a historical, localized gathering of people who profess
faith in Christ whether or not they are truly in Christ, the invisible church
cannot be observed outwardly because its members are known only by
God, who sees their internal faith and not merely their outward profession
of faith. See also church.
Irenaeus (c. A.D. 130-200). An early Greek father of the church who
served as a bishop, theologian and apologist and who wrote particularly
against *Gnostic heresies of the day. Irenaeus is probably best known for
proposing the doctrine of recapitulation, that is, the suggestion that Christ
came to "sum up" (recapitulate) all that humans were intended to be,
especially in light of all that was lost through the sin of Adam.
irenics. The practice of debating and discussing Christian doctrines with
other Christians who are theologically *orthodox but with whom there are
matters of genuine theological disagreement. It involves the friendly but
rigorous task of doing theological reflection together within the
community of faith. Irenics stands in contrast to *polemics, which is the
practice of debating, discussing and refuting the positions of those who
stand outside the accepted orthodox boundaries of Christian theology yet
who insist on calling themselves Christian.
irresistible grace. A doctrine found in most * Calvinistic theologies that
teaches that the Holy Spirit will work in the hearts of those whom God has
chosen (the *elect) such that they cannot, or at least will not, resist the
saving *grace God imparts. Most Calvinist theologians distinguish
between God's general grace (given by God to all humans in the testimony
of creation) and God's saving, effectual or efficacious grace (which is
applied directly to the heart of persons such that they respond in faith and
which is thereby irresistible).
I
judgment. In a broad sense, God's evaluation as to the rightness or
wrongness of an act of a creature, whether human or angelic, using the
standard of God's own righteous and holy character. In a more specific
sense, judgment refers to the future event when God through Jesus Christ
will judge all people, whether righteous or wicked, for their works done
while on earth. The NT indicates that all people, whether Christian or not,
will be judged according to their deeds; however, Christians will be
accepted in light of the work of Christ on their behalf.
justice. In a general sense, the practice of giving reward or punishment for
what is rightly due to a person or group of people. From a theological
perspective, because God is sinless and holy, the justice of God demands
that all persons and nations receive punishment because of their sin. In
Christ the requirements of divine justice are met, and as a result,
individuals can find mercy from God through Jesus Christ as the Holy
Spirit draws them and convicts them of sin. In light of God's own just
dealings with humankind, God also demands that humans deal justly with
one another (Mt 23:23) and seek to release those under oppression,
whether because of ethnic origin, gender or sociopolitical status (Is 58:6).
justification, justification by faith. A forensic (legal) term related to the
idea of acquittal, justification refers to the divine act whereby God makes
humans, who are sinful and therefore worthy of condemnation, acceptable
before a God who is holy and righteous. More appropriately described as
"justification by grace through faith," this key doctrine of the
*Reformation asserts that a sinner is justified (pardoned from the
punishment and condemnation of sin) and brought into relationship with
God by faith in God's grace alone.
K
kairos. One of several Greek words for "time," kairos usually refers to a
specific point of time as carrying crucial meaning for human life. This is
in contrast to kronos, which designates the chronological passing of time.
Hence a "kairos moment" is an event in history in which God unveils some
dimension of the eternal purposes of *salvation to humankind or an event
that is central in God's dealings with humans. The fundamental kairos
moment is the Christ event, that is, the life, death and *resurrection of
Jesus, together with his future return (the *parousia).
Rant, Immanuel (1724-1804). One of the greatest philosophers of the
Western tradition. Kant's thought grew out of the mindset of the
*Enlightenment (which emphasized the primacy of reason in human life
and in the pursuit of knowledge) and has had a profound affect on
nineteenth- and twentieth-century philosophy and theology. Kant held that
human knowing was dependent on the active mind and that theology
should be conducted from the foundation of our sense of being morally
conditioned.
kenosis, kenoticism. Derived from the use of the Greek verb ekenosen (he
emptied himself) in Philippians 2:7-11. Kenosis refers to the self-
emptying of Christ in the incarnation, as well as his conscious acceptance
of obedience to the divine will that led him to death by crucifixion. Many
theologians see in the term a reference to Jesus' choice not to exercise the
prerogatives and powers that were his by virtue of his divine nature. In the
nineteenth century certain thinkers built this idea into a kenotic
*Christology,which spoke of the incarnation as the self-emptying of the
preexistent, eternal Son to become the human Jesus. This self-emptying
involved the setting aside of certain divine attributes, or at least the
independent exercise of his divine powers.
kerygma. Literally,
"proclamation," the term refers to the fundamental NT
message of the gospel of Jesus Christ (the content of the preached Word)
or to the proclamation of this message, especially through preaching (the
act of publicly proclaiming the Word). The basis for the kerygma lies in
Jesus' own preaching (Mk 1:14-15), but theologians generally focus more
specifically on the proclamation of the early church as it witnessed to the
person and work of Jesus as the Christ.
Kierkegaard, Soren (1813-1855). Among the most influential modern
philosophical and theological writers, Kierkegaard em phasized subjective
truth and experience rather than universal ideals. His "*existential"
dialectics dealt with the position of the individual human existing in the
presence of God, thereby emphasizing the relation of the individual soul to
God almost to the exclusion of the idea of Christian community.
Kierkegaard likewise linked truth with the individual knowing subject
rather than with the external object.
kingdom. The dynamic reign of God as sovereign over creation. Although
the roots of the term lie in the OT, the Christian understanding arises more
specifically from Jesus' proclamation of the inbreaking of God's rule.
Hence the kingdom is God's divine, kingly reign as proclaimed and
inaugurated by Jesus' life, ministry, death and *resurrection, and the
subsequent outpouring of the Spirit into the world. In this sense Christ is
reigning now, and the kingdom of God has arrived. At the same time the
*church awaits the future consummation of the divine reign. This
"already" and "not yet" dimension of the kingdom of God implies that it is
both a given reality (or the divine power at work in the present) and a
process that is moving toward its future fulfillment or completion.
koinonia. A Greek word meaning "fellowship," "communion" or "sharing
together." The term refers to the community or fellowship of Christian
believers participating together in the life of Christ as made possible by
the Spirit. This foundational shared participation in turn indicates the
basic characteristics of the Christians' life together as a community of
disciples.
L
laity. Literally,
"people," the word refers technically to the whole people of
God incorporated into the body of Christ. The term has come to refer to
those who are nonordained as distinguished from ordained *clergy.
law, legalism. The law means variously the OT in general, the Torah
(especially the Pentateuch or first five books of the Bible), the Ten
Commandments or the several codes of conduct that identified Israel as
set apart and in covenantal relationship with God. Jesus summarized the
law with two commandments: to love God with heart, soul, mind and
strength, and to love one's neighbor as oneself. Paul declares that the law
is fulfilled in Jesus, who sets humans free from the law's penalty of death.
Legalism is the attitude that identifies morality with the strict observance
of laws or that views adherence to moral codes as defining the boundaries
of a community. Religious legalism focuses on obedience to laws or moral
codes based on the (misguided) assumption that such obedience is a means
of gaining divine favor.
liberalism. A movement in nineteenth- and twentieth-century *Protestant
circles that builds from the assumption that Christianity is reconcilable
with the positive human aspirations, including the quest for autonomy.
Liberalism desires to adapt religion to modern thought and culture.
Consequently, it views divine love as realized primarily, if not totally, in
love of one's neighbor and the *kingdom of God as a present reality found
especially within an ethically transformed society. One of the significant
early liberal theologians was Albrecht *Ritschl. See alsopostliber- alism.
liberation theology. This term most often refers to a theological movement
developed in the late 1960s in Latin America (where it continues to hold
prominence). In attempting to unite theology and sociopolitical concerns,
liberation theologians such as Gustavo Gutierrez emphasize the scriptural
theme of liberation, understood as the overcoming of poverty and
oppression. Liberation theologies have also found expression among
representatives of seemingly marginalized groups in North American
society, including women, African Americans, Hispanics, Native
Americans and Asian Americans.
limited atonement. Sometimes called "particular redemption," the view
that Jesus' death secured *salvation for only a limited number of persons
(the elect), in contrast to the idea that the work of the cross is intended for
all humankind (as in "unlimited atonement"). This view resulted from the
post-Reformation development of the doctrine of *election in Calvinist
circles. Proponents claim that because not everyone is saved, God could
not have intended that Christ die for everyone. See also atonement
theories.
literalism. A strict adherence to the exact word or meaning, either in
interpretation or translation, of the biblical text. Regarding interpretation,
literalism generally attempts to understand the author's intent by pursuing
the most plain, obvious meaning of the text as judged by the interpreter. In
translation, the attempt is made to convey with utmost accuracy through
the words of another language the actual meaning of the biblical text.
liturgy. The English word arises from the Greek term leitourgia, which was
connected to the idea of sacrifice and designated the priestly service
connected initially with the temple (e.g., Lk 1:23) and subsequently with
Christian ministry and worship. Liturgy came to designate the church's
official (or unofficial) public and corporate ritual of worship, including
the *Eucharist (or Communion), baptism and other sacred acts. Certain
ecclesiastical traditions (such as Roman Catholic, *Eastern Orthodox,
*Anglican) follow a set pattern of worship (the liturgy), whereas many
Protestant churches prefer a less structured style. This gives rise to the
distinction sometimes made between "liturgical" and "nonliturgical"
churches.
logical positivism. See positivism, logical positivism, logical empiricism.
logocentrism. The designation by postmodern philosophers such as
Jacques Derrida for the philosophical method that looks to the logos (the
word or written language) as the carrier of meaning. Derrida rejects the
attendant philosophical assumption that human language is able to
designate, signify or represent an *essence (or presence of being) that we
can come to know.
Lord's Supper. A designation for the *sacrament or *ordinance of the
church otherwise known as Communion or the *Eucharist. This
designation, which is most widely used within the believers' churches,
links the contemporary act with the final meal Jesus shared with his
disciples on the evening preceding his crucifixion.
love. In the Christian tradition love (especially agape) is an expression of
the essential nature, of God, the perfect characterization of the relationship
between God and humans, and the supernatural virtue or character of God
reflected in the Christian community in relation to God and one another as
shaped by the indwelling Holy Spirit. This connection between love and
God's own character gives rise to the Christian focus on love as the
fundamental characteristic of Christian discipleship and hence of Christian
*ethics. Many Christian thinkers suggest that the *essence of love is
unconditional giving ofoneselffor the sake ofothers.
Lutheranism. The theological and ecclesiastical tradition based on the
teachings of Martin Luther (1483-1546), who is credited with launching
the *Reformation in Germany. Luther's "tower experience" convinced him
that the essence of the gospel is that *justification comes only by the gift
of God's grace appropriated by faith (see sola gratia; sola fide). According
to Luther, God declares the sinner righteous through Jesus' death rather
than through human merit or works. Faith entails trust in and acceptance
of God's gift of *salvation through the "merits" of Christ.
M
magisterium. The prerogative of the church to proclaim and teach the good
news about Jesus. In many church bodies the term refers more specifically
to the group of persons, generally vocational theologians and church
officials, who together possess the authority to determine the content of
and to pass on to others the official doctrine, teachings and practices of the
church. Magisterium is used in a more limited sense to refer to the
authoritative teaching body within the Roman Catholic Church, consisting
of the bishops under the authority of the pope. The bishops fulfill various
kinds of "ordinary" magisterium in an ongoing manner. The
"extraordinary" magisterium emerges when the bishops are assembled into
a council or the pope proclaims some new *dogma (ex cathedra).
magisterial Reformation. The designation for the Lutheran, Zwinglian and
Calvinist wings of the sixteenth-century Protestant movement, in contrast
to the *Anabaptist wing (sometimes designated the *Radical
Reformation). In contrast to the An abaptist leaders, who acted apart from
the sponsorship of political rulers, the magisterial Reformers were
convinced that political power ought to be employed to advance the cause
of ecclesiastical reform. See also Reformation.
Manichaeism. The third-century religion founded by the Iranian
philosopher Mani, who believed he was the last and greatest prophet sent
to perfect the Persian, Christian and Buddhist religions. Manichaeism is a
form of dualistic *Gnosticism offering *salvation by knowledge. In
practice it included strict *asceticism (especially in the form of
discouraging involvement in physical pleasures) on the basis of the belief
that the imperfect is subject to continual physical rebirth. Before his
conversion *Augustine was a Manichaean for nine years.
Marcionism. The movement begun with Marcion in the second century,
which rejected the validity of the OT witness for Christians because the
God of the OT was believed to be incompatible with the loving God
revealed through Jesus. Often persons who focus on the NT in their
preaching or teaching and who overlook the OT as the "cradle" for Jesus
and the Christian faith (and hence who fail to give proper credence to the
"Jewishness" of Jesus and the early church) are accused of Marcionism.
Mariology. The theological teaching about Mary the mother of Jesus. The
Roman Catholic Church has come to accept certain teachings about Mary
that have developed through tradition as an essential part of Christian
*dogma (essential beliefs enjoined on all Catholics). These dogmatic
affirmations include Mary's *immaculate conception, perpetual virginity,
sinlessness, plenitude of grace and bodily *assumption into heaven.
Marxism. Also called dialectical materialism, the political, social and
economic principles espoused by Karl Marx, who held that the
socioeconomic structures of a given society condition its basic values,
laws, customs and beliefs. The theory and practice of Marxism include the
labor theory of value and the goal of the establishment of a classless
society. Marxism has influenced certain strands of contemporary theology,
particularly *liberation theology.
materialism. A philosophical outlook that contends that physical matter is
the only reality or category of existence, so that everything that exists is a
manifestation of the material (rather than a manifestation of the mind). In
more popular parlance, the term refers to pursuit of money and
possessions as a central goal of human existence. See also monism.
medieval, medieval theology. Pertaining to the period generally described
as the Middle Ages, which some date beginning as early as the seventh
century and ending as late as the sixteenth. Medieval theology was chiefly
concerned with systematizing and organizing Christian truth as it had been
developed by the leading thinkers of the *patristic era. This led eventually
to the writing of the great theological treatises that encompassed the entire
body of Christian teaching. The flowering of medieval theology came in
the so-called high Middle Ages (the twelfth and thirteenth centuries),
especially in the work of Thomas *Aquinas, such as in his *Summa
Theologica (summary of theology).
memorialism. Originating with Ulrich *Zwingli, a view of the *Lord's
Supper that sees the rite as symbolic, as representing (or memorializing)
Christ's self-giving on the cross (together with his last supper with the
disciples). In contrast to the idea of the *real presence espoused both by
the medieval theologians and by Luther (e.g., the theories of
*transubstantiation and *consubstantiation), memorialists believe that
Christ's presence is not localized in the communion elements but within
the gathered community of believers. Memorialists consider the word is in
Christ's words,
"This is my body.... This is my blood" (Mk 14:22, 24) to be
figurative, so that it means "signifies" or "represents." Hence by this
phrase Jesus was not referring literally to his physical body and blood but
was indicating that the physical elements are symbols of his life that
would be given for them.
Mennonites. Originally the followers of Menno Simons (14961561), a
leader among the so-called *Anabaptists in the sixteenth century. In
keeping with the *bclievers'
-church tradition of which they are a part,
Mennonite communities recognize no elaborate statements of common
doctrine and reject the idea of a national church, infant baptism and the
theory of the *real presence of Christ in the *Eucharist. They uphold
personal and corporate piety through strict adherence to the NT. Generally,
Mennonites are pacifists.
merit. Theologically, merit is a person's perceived right to be rewarded by
God for works done on God's behalf. Although the Catholic tradition
continues to uphold merit as a valid Christian category, the Reformers
repudiated it, particularly in favor of the doctrine of *justification by
grace through faith.
Messiah. A Hebrew term meaning "anointed one." The OT people of God
came to anticipate a person anointed by the Spirit who would function
once again as king and priest over Israel. Hence in Jewish (OT and
intertestamental) theology, the Messiah was the person, whether
supernatural or earthly, endowed with special powers and functions by
God, who would appear as the divinely appointed, *eschatological
deliverer and ruler of Israel. Although Jesus rarely used the title
specifically for himself, the NT designation of Messiah (Greek Christos)
belongs only to Jesus, both as a title and as a personal name. Jesus was the
one who was truly anointed by the Holy Spirit, and as the bearer of the
Spirit he has the prerogative to pour out the Spirit on his followers.
metanarrative. The idea that there is an overarching, all-embracing story
of humankind into which all the more particular narratives fit (e.g.,
*salvation history). Christians believe that the biblical narrative of
*creation-*Fall-*redemption-new creation is this all-embracing
metanarrative, for the biblical story is the narrative of all humankind. In
this sense the biblical narrative functions in Christian teaching as the
central metanarrativc.
metaphor, metaphorical theology. A metaphor is a figure of speech in
which a word or phrase that has an accepted, literal meaning is used in
place ofanother to suggest a likeness or similarity between them.
Metaphorical theology holds that God can only be spoken about through
metaphors. Thus we must use metaphors to name our experience of God
(the "Transcendent"); consequently, God can be described only in
relational terms (that is, through the relational language of metaphor).
Furthermore, metaphorical theologians, such as Sallie McFague, generally
claim that such metaphors are culturally conditioned representations
created by the mind as we seek to make experience intelligible.
metaphysics. The philosophical exploration into the ultimate nature of
reality lying beyond the merely physical (meta = beyond). Metaphysics
deals with *ontological concerns, that is, with questions about what
constitutes something as "real" or as having "being."
method in theology, methodology. A particular systematic procedure (or
set of procedures), technique or mode of inquiry used in the development
of a theological position. Systematic theologians generally treat matters of
theological method in the opening sections of their treatises (the
*prolegomenon). Such methodological questions often include: What is
theology? What constitutes a valid, true or helpful theology? Why is
theology important? Is theology a science? What forms the foundation of
the task of engaging in theology? What are the sources (or what is the
source) of theology? And what constitutes the proper way of constructing
a theological system?
method of correlation. A theological method that seeks to correlate or
bring together theological truth with contemporary philosophical or
cultural questions. The theologian using this method believes that these
questions provide the "point of contact" between the human quest for truth
and the revealed truth of the Christian faith. According to Paul *Tillich
(who may have coined the designation), philosophy raises questions and
poses problems that reflect the existential concerns humans share.
Theology in turn seeks to understand the questions and to answer them in
ways that are both culturally relevant and faithful to the original Christian
message.
Methodism. Originally a system of faith and practice established by John
and Charles *Wesley and their followers in the eighteenth century. This
evangelistic, revivalist movement expanded throughout Britain, the United
States and other parts of the world. In early Methodism converts were
incorporated into highly disciplined bands or societies that emphasized
corporate confession, prayer, service and personal holiness. Modern
Methodism reflects a strong commitment to practical social involvement.
See Wesleyanism.
middle knowledge. The philosophical theory that asserts that God knows
all possible events and all theoretical truths, as well as all actual events
and truths. Middle knowledge suggests that God knows not only what
humans actually do but also what humans would do under hypothetical
circumstances. For example, in the case of persons who die without
hearing the gospel message, God knows how they would have responded
had they heard it. Some theologians conclude that based on this middle
knowledge, God will save those who remained beyond the pale of the
gospel in this life but would have accepted Christ had the message come to
them.
millennium, millennialism. Arising from the Latin word for "thousand,"
the millennium refers to the thousand-year reign of Christ mentioned in
Revelation 20:1-8. There are basically three understandings as to what this
text teaches: *premillennialism, *postmillennialism and *amillennialism.
In contrast to amillennialists, who do not see the millennium as a specific
period of history, both post- and premillennialists are technically
millennialists in that both anticipate that the millennium will occur at
some future time (or arrived in the recent past). Millennialism also goes
by the term chiliasm, arising out of the biblical Greek word chilias,
meaning "one thousand." In contemporary theology, chiliasm is often used
in the narrower sense of referring to belief in the prcmillennial return of
Christ.
modalism. Also called *Sabellianism, the trinitarian heresy that does not
view Father, Son and Spirit as three particular "persons in relation" but
merely as three modes or manifestations of the one divine person of God.
Thus God comes in *salvation history as Father to create and give the law,
as Son to redeem and as Spirit to impart grace.
modernism. The attempt to bring Christianity into harmony with the
concerns of the modern era or modern people. Within Roman Catholicism,
modernism was a liberal movement in the late nineteenth century aimed at
bringing Catholic tradition into closer relation with (then) modern
philosophical, historical, scientific and social views, especially by
devaluing belief in the supernatural. See also liberalism.
modernity. The cultural worldview of the nineteenth and twenti eth
centuries, inherited from the *Enlightenment and reflective of its values
and belief systems. Modernity is epitomized by the belief that through the
exercise of reason alone we arc capable of attaining knowledge, even
knowledge of the divine, and that with such knowledge humans can
progress, eventually even to the point of creating a utopian (or ideal)
human order.
modes of being. The language used by the prominent twentiethcentury
theologian Karl *Barth to express the persons of the *Trinity. Barth was
motivated by his reaction to the limitations of the modernized
psychological understanding of person. Barth challenged the tritheistic
idea of the Trinity as three distinct, personal centers of consciousness and
will that stand apart from each other. He emphasized that the one God
simultaneously exists in three self-differentiated "repetitions" or ways of
being: Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
monarchianism. A movement in the second and third centuries that
attempted to safeguard *monotheism and the unity (mono- arche -
"one
source") of the Godhead. By denying the personal reality of the Son and
the Spirit as separate from the Father, however, this defensive attempt
resulted in an antitrinitarian heresy. Two forms of monarchianism
developed: *adoptionist, or dynamic monarchianism, which understood
Jesus as merely a prophet filled with the Spirit and thus "adopted" by God;
and *modalism (or *Sabellianism), which viewed Jesus as one of the
modes through which the one God reveals himself to us.
monasticism. Away of life within the Catholic and *Eastern Orthodox
traditions that emphasizes celibacy, life-in-community, poverty, common
worship, silence and contemplation. The monastic movement spawned
monasteries as places in which monks could live and work together,
generally as cloistered from the larger society.
monism. Any antidualist philosophy that appeals to one unifying principle
to explain all that is. In response to the metaphysical question "How many
things are real or exist?" monism answers,
"Only one reality or thing" or
"One kind of thing with many different things within that category"
(attributive monism). In effect, monism allows for no distinction between
God and creation. monotheism. The belief in one God (mono-theos) as
opposed to belief in many gods (polytheism). Although monotheists may
acknowledge the reality of other supernatural powers (such as angels and
demons), they believe that all such powers are ultimately under the control
or authority of the one God who alone is supreme. Monotheism in its
various forms is the teaching of Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
Montanism. A second-century prophetic movement that emphasized the
*imminent return of Christ and imposed a strict morality on the faithful as
they waited and prepared for the end of the world. The designation
Montanism arises from the leader of the movement, Montanus, who
together with several women served as prophet to the group. Although its
leaders did not intend their prophecies to undermine scriptural authority,
the movement was nonetheless considered heretical by the emerging
church authority. The church father *Tertullian eventually joined the
Montanists.
moral argument (for God's existence). The argument first used by
Immanuel *Kant, which claims that morality (humans' seeking the
"highest good") presupposes the existence of God, who is both the
lawgiver and the judge who will reward humankind's moral striving. More
recently, C. S. Lewis offered a revision of the moral argument.
moral influence theory of the atonement. The view attributed to Peter
Abelard that above all the cross is the grand display of God's love. In
response to the love of God thus displayed, we in turn love God and live
for God rather than continuing in sin.
mysticism. The belief and practice that seeks a personal, experiential
(sometimes referred to as contemplative) knowledge of God by means of a
direct, nonabstract and loving encounter or union with God. Although a
psychophysical dimension (including visions, dreams or special
revelation) may be part of the mystical experience, this dimension is not
necessary. Instead, Christian mystics generally teach that the true test of
the experience is the resulting fruit of the Spirit in the mystic's life.
myth. The term myth is most often associated with fable or with the
historically inauthentic (fiction) rather than with truth and objective
reality. Hence some people apply myth to any part of the Christian
message that includes the supernatural or miraculous (see Bultmann;
demythologizing). Myth can also be used to describe the true but
transcendent or ineffable quality of God's revelation, which is beyond
rational, linguistic description (see Brunner). Myth also connotes the
language or imagery borrowed from the *cosmological/cosmogonical
(creation) myths to speak of God.
N
narrative, narrative theology. Since the 1970s, a theological approach that
utilizes the concept of story and the human person as storyteller (e.g.,
Gabriel Fackre, Hans Frei, Stanley Hauerwas, George Stroup) to provide
the central motif for theological reflection. Narrative theologians claim
that we construct our personal identity as our individual stories are joined
with the transcendent story of the religious community and ultimately
with the overarching narrative of *salvation history.
naturalism, natural theology. Naturalism sometimes refers to a form of
*atheism and *materialism that maintains that the "natural" universe
(composed of energy and matter and based on natural laws) is the sum
total of reality, thereby negating human freedom, absolute values and,
ultimately, *existential meaning. As an ethical theory naturalism suggests
that ethical judgments arise out of or are based in the universe itself or
"the way things naturally are." Natural theology maintains that humans
can attain particular knowledge about God through human reason by
observing the created order as one locus of divine *revelation.
natural headship. The theory about original sin, sometimes attributed to
*Augustine, that declares that Adam is the "natural head" of humankind in
that he is the father of the entire race. This observation, in turn, suggests
how it is that all humans are guilty for Adam's sin: Because Adam is the
progenitor of all, all humans were present in Adam when he sinned.
neo-orthodoxy. An early twentieth-century Protestant movement
(involving, among others, Karl *Barth, Emil *Brunner and Reinhold and
H. Richard *Niebuhr) borne out of a sense that Protestant *liberalism had
illegitimately accomodated the gospel to modern science and culture, and
in the process had lost the classical focus on the *transcendence of God as
well as the Word of God. In this situation neo-orthodox thinkers promoted
a return to the basic principles of *Reformation theology and the early
church (especially the primacy of Scripture, human depravity and God's
work in Christ) as the basis for proclaiming the gospel in the
contemporary context, while taking seriously the *Enlightenment critique
of *orthodoxy and rejecting Protestant *scholasticism. Neo-orthodox
theologians often used a *dialectical approach, which sought theological
insight through the juxtaposing of seemingly opposing formulations held
together as paradoxically true (e.g., humans are fallen and depraved, yet
free and accountable before God).
Neo-Platonism. The last stage of Greek philosophy (identified with
Plotinus), which greatly influenced certain early church thinkers,
particularly *Origen and *Augustine. Neo-Platonists taught that
everything emanates (flows) from the transcendent principle of the One
and is destined to return to the One through a process of purification.
Nestorianism. Condemned by the *Council of Ephesus (A.D. 431), the
view held by Nestorius, bishop of Constantinople, that although Jesus
Christ was one person (God and man united), his two natures (one human
and one divine) existed side by side and hence were separable. One
consequence of this view was that Jesus' suffering for humankind was seen
as an act of Jesus in his humanity but not in his deity.
Nicene Creed. Originally the theological confession resulting from the
first *Council of Nicaea (A.D. 325), convened by the emperor Constantine
to resolve church divisions related to the Arian controversy (see
Arianism). The creed reflects the teaching that the Son is of one substance
with the Father (see homoousios). The Nicene Creed recited in churches
today resembles the original, but having been revamped at the Council of
Constantinople (A.D. 381), the current version is longer and excludes
certain original phrases.
Niebuhr, Reinhold (1892-1971). One of the most prominent voices in
American theology throughout the middle years of the twentieth century.
His rejection of *liberalism drew Niebuhr to focus attention on Christian
*anthropology, which he believed presented the human person as both
fallen and free. Niebuhr was likewise interested in the relevance of
Christianity for contemporary social problems. Against what he saw as the
"moral utopianism" (unbridled optimism) of liberalism, he proposed
"Christian Realism," that is, the attempt to bring about whatwas
realistically possible, namely, a more just situation than was present
previously (proximate justice) rather than inaugurate the perfect social
order, which he deemed unattainable due to our fallenness. See neo-
orthodoxy.
nihilism. In general, the complete rejection of (and in the extreme, the
destruction of) beliefs and values associated with moral and traditional
social structures. Philosophically, nihilism represents an attitude of total
skepticism regarding objective truth claims. Nihilism views knowledge as
dependent on sensory experience alone, so that moral and theological
claims are meaningless.
noetic. Relating to, based on or having to do with the intellect or the
process of knowing.
nominalism. The theory of knowledge that denies the objective reality of
universal principles, maintaining that "universals" arc mere concepts with
no reality apart from their existence in the mind of the individual. This
theory is sometimes attributed to the medieval thinker William of Occam
(see Occam's razor).
noncompatibilism. See compatibilism.
nonfoundationalism. The view that suggests that knowledge does not arise
as conclusions from certain nondebatable first principles (see
foundationalism). Instead, nonfoundationalists argue that knowledge
consists of a set of beliefs that fit together in some interconnected pattern
(e.g., a "web of belief") and hence mutually support each other.
norm. In *ethics an authoritative standard or principle of right action that
is binding on members of a group. Norms serve to control, regulate or
guide what is considered acceptable behavior or attitudes for a group, thus
contributing to its overall definition. In theology a norm is what gives
shape to and determines the content of doctrinal formulations. Protestants
generally appeal to one norm, Scripture, as standing above all others. Thus
the Bible becomes the "norming norm" (norma normans) for theological
reflection and construction.
notitia. Latin for knowledge of, or acquaintance with, something or
someone. In theology notitia came to refer to one aspect of faith (the
others being *assensus and *fiducia). To believe in Christ a person must
first become acquainted with the gospel message.
numinous. Adopted from the Latin word numen, a word coined by German
theologian Rudolph Otto to describe the core of religious experience as an
encounter with the presence of "the holy." The numinous includes aspects
of reason and morality, and because the numinous is "felt," it can be
described but not strictly defined.
O
Occam's (Okham's) razor. One of the main axioms of nominalist
philosopher William of Occam (c. 1300-1349), namely, that principles
employed to explain any phenomenon should not be multiplied without
necessity. In the modern era Occam's razor was used to eliminate the
supernatural from view. Hence critics argued, for example, that we need no
longer appeal to demonic possession to explain what is better referred to
as some purely human malady such as epilepsy or mental illness.
oikonomia. Greek for "economy" or "administration." In theology the term
refers to *salvation history or to God's providential plan and care
(administration) of creation. More specifically, oikonomia has become
synonymous with the main events in God's plan of salvation, particularly
Christ's *incarnation and the sending of the Spirit.
omnipotence. The attribute that refers to God's ability to do whatever is
consistent with God's own character and being in effecting the divine plan
for creation. God's omnipotence is primarily demonstrated in God's
overturning evil for good. This is especially evident in the death of Jesus,
which although it was the act of malicious people, has become God's
means of human *salvation.
omnipresence. The attribute that refers to God's being present everywhere
in creation at the same time. Perhaps omnipresence more correctly
suggests that all things are present to God. As a result there is nowhere in
the universe that lies beyond the cognition (and care) of God.
omniscience. The attribute that denotes God's knowing all things.
Omniscience means that all events are present to the divine mind; that is,
God has direct cognition of everything in creation.
ontological argument. An argument for the existence of God that argues
from the idea of God itself to the reality of God. It was attributed first to
*Anselm and later to Descartes, who declared that because God is by
definition "the most perfect being," God must exist; otherwise God would
lack one perfection, namely, existence.
ontology. The branch of *metaphysics concerned with the nature of being.
To speak of something as ontological is to refer to its essential nature, as
opposed to its epistemological aspects. Ontology, therefore, focuses on
being and *essence, in contrast to *epistemology, which speaks about how
humans come to know something.
ordinance. Literally, an authoritative *decree or *law. Certain *free-church
groups (such as the Baptists) refer to baptism and the *Lord's Supper as
ordinances rather than *sacraments. In so doing they highlight the
voluntary nature of these rites as having been ordained (commanded) by
Christ.
ordination. Latin, meaning "to set in order" and later,
"to appoint to
office." Ordination most often refers to the appointment to an official
ministerial capacity, often accompanied by the laying on of hands.
Ordination in the Roman Catholic and Orthodox traditions is considered a
*sacrament. Most churches ordain persons to pastoral leadership and
service. Some churches also ordain persons to other offices, such as
bishops (e.g., Catholics and *Anglicans) or *deacons (certain Baptists).
Occasionally the term is associated with God's *election and
*predestination.
ordo salutis. Latin, meaning "order of salvation," that is, the succession of
events in God's salvific program. Although both the Catholic and
Reformed traditions believe that *salvation comes only through Christ,
they diverge dramatically regarding the ordo salutis. The ordo salutis of
the *Reformed tradition includes such matters as effectual calling,
*regeneration, *faith, *justification, *sanctification and *glorification.
The Roman Catholic Church, in contrast,
"dispenses grace" through the
ordered *sacraments of baptism and confirmation, the *Eucharist,
penance, either marriage or ordination, and the rite of healing, known in
the past as extreme unction (the preparatory rite for death).
Origen (A.D. 185-254). A theologian and biblical scholar of the early
Greek church, Origen vigorously defended the *orthodox Christian faith
both in his speaking and in his monumental works. However, some of his
theological speculations and approaches to Scripture led Origen to be
declared a heretic in A.D. 553 by the Second Council of Constantinople.
His conflicting trinitarian views laid foundations both for *Arianism and
for future orthodox trinitarian theology. He is perhaps best known for his
idea of "the eternal generation of the Son"; that is, throughout all eternity,
the Father generates the Son. Rather than an act in time, this generation is
an eternal act.
original sin, original righteousness (justice). Strictly speaking, original sin
is the state of alienation from God into which all humans are born.
Original righteousness (or original justice), in contrast, is the state of
innocence in which Adam and Eve are thought to have existed before their
fall into sin. Thus, because they had not yet disobeyed God, the first
humans were righteous (without sin) in God's sight. Historically, original
sin was connected to the discussion about the manner in which Adam's sin
affects all humans, such as through the transmission of Adam's fallen
nature or through God's imputation (crediting) of Adam's sin.
orthodoxy. Literally,
"right praise" or "right belief" (as opposed to
*heresy). Being orthodox implies being characterized by consistency in
belief and worship with the Christian faith (in the Catholic tradition,
consistency with the church) as witnessed to in Scripture, the early
Christian writers and the official teachings, *creeds and *liturgy of the
church. Orthodoxy is sometimes used in a narrower sense to refer to the
*Eastern Orthodox tradition.
ousia. Greek for "substance" or "being." Trinitarian thought suggests that
the Son derives his ousia from the Father, and yet what the Son is so the
Father is exactly (see homoousios). In their formulation of the doctrine of
the *Trinity, the *Cappadocian fathers declared that God was one ousia but
three hypostaseis.
P
panentheism. The belief that God's being includes and permeates the entire
universe so that everything exists in God. In contrast to *pantheism,
panentheists declare that God's being is greater than and not exhausted by
the universe. God is affected by each event in the universe, and thus God's
knowledge must change and grow. However, God simultaneously retains
personal integrity and complete reality.
pantheism. Greek for "everything is God," the belief that God and the
universe are essentially identical. More specifically, pantheism is the
designation for the understanding of the close connection between the
world and the divine reality found in certain religions, including
Hinduism. One variety of pantheism speaks of God as the "soul" of the
universe, which is thought to be God's "body." Pantheistic religions often
suggest that our experience of being disconnected from each other and
from the divine is merely an illusion.
paradigm, paradigm shift. A paradigm is a conscious or unconscious
structure of thought, belief and action. A paradigm shift is a change within
this structure that results in the ability to perceive and consider things
differently and thus to respond in a radically new or different manner.
Through the writings of the twentieth-century American philosopher of
science Thomas Kuhn, these terms have gained widespread use.
paradox. An apparent contradiction. A paradox may come in the form of a
seemingly self-contradictory statement, in multiple statements that are
mutually contradictory or by way of a statement that stands in
contradiction to common sense or to a commonly held position. The
Christian faith affirms several paradoxes-independent truths that seem
irreconcilable to others and yet are held together by faith. One often-cited
example is the belief that Jesus is fully divine yet fully human.
Theologians often seek to pierce into these seemingly paradoxical aspects
of the faith.
parousia. A Greek word used to refer to the second coming of Jesus Christ
at the end of history. Literally, the term means "presence." Hence it
designates Christ's return as the point at which he will be fully present to
the world or his presence will be fully revealed.
patripassianism. Derived from the Greek words pater (father) and pascho
(to suffer), the term refers to an early type of *modalism that suggested
that the one God (the Father) became incarnate in the form of the Son, was
born of a virgin and suffered and died on the cross. This belief was
declared heretical by the early church.
patristic era. From the Greek pater, a term pertaining to the first few
centuries of the church after the writing of the NT or to the early church
fathers or writers of that period (generally A.D. 100-750). The patristic era
began after the death of the apostles and was followed by the Middle Ages.
Important patristic authors include such luminaries as *Irenaeus, *Origen,
*Tertullian, the *Cappadocian fathers and *Augustine.
pedobaptism, paedobaptism (infant baptism). The practice of baptizing
infants or children who are deemed not old enough to verbalize faith in
Christ. There are several conceptions of the significance of infant baptism.
Some Christians view the act as effecting *regeneration; others see it as
the symbol of God's grace extended to the infant prior to personal
response; others suggest that, like *circumcision in the OT, infant baptism
marks an infant as a member of the *covenant community.
Pelagianism. The teaching of British monk Pelagius (c. 354-415), who
supposedly declared that human effort and merit could bring about
*salvation without divine grace. Pelagius was vigor ously opposed by the
church father *Augustine.
penal-substitution theory of the atonement. The view that speaks of sin as
the breaking of God's law, for which the penalty is death. Hence on the
cross Christ suffered the death penalty in the sinner's place and so
appeased the wrath of God. This theory was first proposed in the
*Reformation and later became the most widely held view among
Protestants, especially *evangelicals, in Britain and the United States.
penance. In the Catholic tradition, the *sacrament of *reconcih- ation by
which the penitent person is reconciled to God and the church through the
forgiveness of sin. Often such reconciliation comes after the penitent
sinner performs some prescribed act as an indication of repentance.
Pentecost, Pentecostalism. Originally the culmination of the OT Feast of
Weeks, the church celebrates Pentecost as the anniversary of the coming of
the Holy Spirit on the disciples fifty days after Jesus' *resurrection.
Pentecostalism is a movement that began in the early twentieth century
that emphasizes a postconversion "baptism in the Holy Spirit" for all
believers, with *glossolalia (speaking in tongues) as the initial evidence of
such baptism. Historically, Pentecostals have been a missionaryminded
people, due in part to the fact that the first Pentecostals taught that one
central purpose of baptism in the Spirit was to endow the believer with
power for evangelism.
perichoresis. See circumincession.
perseverance of the saints. The mandate in Scripture to remain steadfast in
the love of God and to patiently endure hardship, particularly in the face of
persecution. In *Calvinist theology the perseverance (or preservation) of
the saints refers to the belief that those who are truly among the elect will
remain faithful to the end. In recent *evangelical theology a discussion has
emerged as to how to balance the doctrine of eternal security (everyone
who has accepted Christ as Savior will enjoy eternity with God regardless
of postconversion personal conduct) with the biblical call to believers to
persevere, that is, not to disobey or fall away from faith. See also
Arminianism, Arminius; Calvinism, John Calvin.
person. Used of humans to denote a living being with the capacity for
freedom, consciousness and relationships; of God as similarly yet
preeminently personal; and of the three members of the *Trinity. When
referring to the triune personhood of God, person does not have any
similarity to the contemporary psychological understanding, nor does it
connote three separate Gods. Instead, the trinitarian persons are relational
in their personhood.
phenomenology. A philosophical movement of the twentieth century
associated with Edmund Husserl and his followers. Phenomenology
initially focused on *epistemology, that is, how we gain knowledge of
*essences or the essential features of the world (abstract properties) on the
basis of our perceptions of concrete realities (particular instances of those
properties). Phenomenologists later turned their attention to the essences
of human mental acts. Consequently phenomenology came to be
associated with the study of the development of human consciousness and
self-awareness.
pietism. A Bible-oriented, experiential approach to Christian life that
emphasizes personal appropriation of faith and a lifestyle of holiness as
more important than the formal structures of theology (doctrine) and
church order. Initially Pietism was a movement within the Lutheran
Church in Germany that sought to correct the focus on mere assent to
doctrine, which the Pietists believed led to "dead orthodoxy." Philipp
Jacob Spener (1635-1705) is often cited as the father of German Pietism.
Spener sought to bring about change in the church by founding small
groups of pious believers (collegia pietatis) who met for mutual
edification.
Platonism. The philosophical system of the Greek philosopher Plato,
which has immeasurably influenced Western (including Christian)
thought. Plato's philosophy rests primarily on his concept of forms,
*cosmology and *immortality. According to Plato, actual created things
are imperfect copies of transcendent, objective and eternal "forms," the
highest of which is the form of the Good. Human knowledge is innate and
can be apprehended by rational reflection and Socratic "extraction." At
death the body releases the imprisoned soul, which is then able to
contemplate truth in its pure form.
plenary inspiration. A late-*Reformation view of biblical inspiration that
holds that God is the ultimate author of the Bible in its entirety. That is,
God's superintending work in inspiration extends to the whole Bible and to
each part of the Bible. Plenary inspiration guarantees that all that the
church has come to affirm as Scripture is both authoritative and helpful
for Christian belief and practice.
pluralism. The advocacy and embrace of a social system that promotes the
autonomy and ongoing developmentofdiverse religious, ethnic, racial and
social groups within the system. In theology, pluralism suggests that there
are many paths to and expressions of truth about God and several equally
valid means to *salvation.
pneumatology. The division of Christian doctrine dealing with the Holy
Spirit. The word arises from the Greek words pneuma (spirit) and logos
(the teaching about). Pneumatology explores the person and work of the
Spirit, especially the Spirit's involvement in human *salvation.
point of contact. A term made famous by the debate between *Barth and
*Brunner regarding whether or not there is a natural link through which
the gospel can reach the sinful human individual. Barth contended that
faith was created by the preaching of the Word and hence that there was no
natural point of contact, whereas Brunner held that a natural link, such as
in a person's sense of guilt, could be found.
polemics. The art of disputation or controversy (the defense of a thesis by
formal logic). A polemic can also be the aggressive refutation of another
position or principle. In theology polemics often refers to the attempt to
show the superiority of Christian teaching over its rivals by means of a
systematic, ordered delineation of the Christian belief system (a
*systematic theology) that shows the internal consistency of Christian
doctrine as well as its congruence with human knowledge as a whole. See
also irenics.
positivism, logical positivism, logical empiricism. Positivism is the
philosophical position that asserts that we can attain no knowledge of
anything except what is directly apprehended by the senses. Thus "positive
knowledge" arises through science in contrast to speculation, which is
associated with *metaphysics and theology. Logical positivism became an
anti metaphysical position within modern philosophy that suggests that the
central function of philosophy is to analyze language. Using scientific
inquiry as the paradigm of human knowledge, logical positivists dismissed
metaphysical statements as nonsensical.
posse peccare, posse non peccare. See impeccability; sinlessness of Christ.
postliberalism. The late-twentieth-century theological movement that
refutes the reliance on human experience displayed by the older
*liberalism and restores the idea of a community's tradition as a
controlling influence in theology. Postliberalism was initially associated
with thinkers such as George Lindbeck, who rejected both the
*fundamentalist and liberal understandings of the nature of doctrine (as
either objectively true propositions or expressions of subjective religious
experience) in favor of the view that sees doctrine as the "ground rules" of
a religious community.
postmillennialism. The view that Christ's second coming will follow the
*millennium; that is, his return is postmillennial. Postmillennialists assert
that the millennium will come by the spiritual and moral influence of
Christian preaching and teaching in the world. This will result in increased
*conversions, a more important role of the church in the world, earthly
prosperity, the resolution of social ills and a general adoption of Christian
values. Evil will diminish until the time of Christ's second coming, which
will mark as well the *resurrection of the dead and the last *judgment.
postmodernism. A term used to designate a variety of intellectual and
cultural developments in late-twentieth-century Western society. The
*postmodern ethos is characterized by a rejection of modernist values and
a mistrust of the supposedly universal rational principles developed in the
*Enlightenment era. Postmoderns generally embrace *pluralism and place
value in the diversity of worldviews and religions that characterizes
contemporary society.
postmortem evangelism. The belief that the gospel message is somehow
made available after death to persons who had never heard the good news
in this life. These persons are then saved or lost on the basis of their
response to the gospel.
pragmatism. The philosophical system that assumes that every truth or
idea has practical consequences and that these practical consequences are
a critical test of its truthfulness. Some pragma tists add that there are no
transcendental sources of truth; therefore, truth and values are relative to
their usefulness to either individuals or societies.
praxis, orthopraxy. Reflective, responsive action or the practical
expression of the knowledge gained through one's concrete experience and
reflection on it. Orthopraxy, literally meaning "right practice," is living out
the known and experienced truth of the Christian faith in love and justice.
predestination. The sovereign determination and foreknowledge of God.
Some theologians connect divine predestination with the central events of
*salvation history, especially the death of Jesus as foreordained by God. In
*Calvinist theology the doctrine of predestination more specifically holds
that God has from all eternity chosen specific people to bring into eternal
communion with himself. Some Calvinists add that God has also
predestined (or ordained) the rest of humankind for *damnation.
preexistence (of the soul). The Platonic view, taken up by *Origen and
other Greek fathers, that the soul exists with God prior to birth and that it
is assigned a body (through which it becomes polluted) as a penalty for its
sin of looking toward the earth.
premillennialism. The view that the *millennium follows the return of
Christ, which therefore makes his return "premillennial." In the teaching
of some premillennialists the millennium will begin supernaturally and
cataclysmically, preceded by signs of apostasy, worldwide preaching of the
gospel, war, faminc, earthquakes, the coming of the *antichrist and the
great *tribulation. Jesus will then return and rule on the earth with his
saints for one thousand years, during which time peace will reign, the
natural world will no longer be cursed and evil will be suppressed. After a
final rebellion, God will crush evil forever; judge the resurrected,
nonbelieving dead; and establish heaven and hell.
presuppositionalism. A variety of classical *evangelical apologetics often
associated with Cornelius Van Til. Presuppositionalists assert that any
system of belief is built on certain foundational presuppositions
(unprovable assertions that must be believed to make experience
meaningful). As a result, the best means of Christian apologetics is not to
prove certain specific assertions such as the existence of God, the
historicity of the *resurrection or the authority of the Bible. Instead the
presuppositionalist Christian apologist explores the foundational
presuppositions of competing belief systems with the goal of showing that
human experience makes sense (or has meaning) most clearly when
viewed in the light of the foundational teachings of the Christian faith.
prevenient grace. A designation of the priority of God's gracious initiative
on behalf of humans. Hence the term refers to the gracious action of God,
displayed in the person and work of Christ but present in the lives of
human beings through the agency of the Holy Spirit, which precedes all
human response to God's initiative. Calvinists view prevenient grace as
that aspect of special grace by which God redeems, sanctifies and glorifies
the believer; hence, it is bestowed only on those whom God elects to
eternal Be through faith in Jesus Christ. For *Wesley (and consequently
for many *Arminians) prevenient grace is the Holy Spirit's work in the
hearts of all people, which gives them the freedom to say yes to the
gospel; thus prevenient grace can be accepted or rejected, but
*justification cannot be achieved without it.
priesthood of believers. The *Reformation principle that declares that the
privilege and freedom of all believing Christians is to stand before God in
personal communion through Christ, directly receiving forgiveness
without the necessary recourse to human intermediaries. As priests (1 Pet
2:5, 9), believers directly offer sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving to
God and minister to the needs of others. Ordained pastors, in turn, are not
different from other believers in spiritual status but only in function and
appointment.
process theology. A twentieth-century theology based on the philosophy of
Alfred North Whitehead that presents a dipolar God who is integrally
involved in the endless process of the world through two natures: the
"primordial," transcendent nature, wherein lies God's timeless perfection
of character, and the "consequent," immanent nature, by which God is part
of the changing cosmic process. Proponents include John B. Cobb Jr.,
Charles Hartshorne and Marjorie Suchocki.
procession. A term in Christian trinitarian thought that designates the way
the Son and Spirit originate from the Father. The Son's procession from the
Father is called generation, or filiation, whereas the procession of the
Spirit from the Father (and the Son, in Western theology) is called
spiration.
progressive revelation. The belief that God's self-disclosure forms a
progression from the OT era to the NT era. Hence what is known about
God on the basis of Jesus Christ is more complete than what was given
through the Law and the Prophets. Progressive revelation implies that the
OT ought to be understood in the light of the fuller teaching found in the
NT.
prolegomenon. Prefatory remarks: a formal essay or critical discussion
serving to introduce and interpret an extended work. In theology
prolegomenon refers to the methodological questions generally found in
the opening sections of a systematic theology, dealing with the nature and
task of theology and perhaps with the nature and focal point of revelation.
See also method in theology, methodology.
prolepsis. An eschatological outlook that treats a future act or
development as presently existing or already accomplished. A proleptic
act is an eschatological occurrence happening within history prior to the
end. Hence Jesus' resurrection is a prolepsis of the general resurrection
that marks the end of the present age. See also eschaton, eschatology.
propitiation. An offering that turns away the *wrath of God directed
against sin. According to the NT, God has provided the offering that
removes the divine wrath, for in love the Father sent the Son to be the
propitiation (or atoning sacrifice) for human sin (1 Jn 4:10). See also
expiation.
proposition, propositionalism. A proposition is a meaningful, logical
statement (or assertion) that can be confirmed in some manner, such as by
sensory observation, and so can be subjected to scientific inquiry.
Propositionalism presents and defends theological truths by setting them
forth as a series ofpropositions that can be reasonably demonstrated to be
true. Propositionalism serves as an important reminder that the Christian
faith has a rational and, hence, scientifically demonstrable dimension.
Critics accuse propositionalists of reducing the faith to a cognitive level
and thereby missing the sense of wonder, awe and mystery about God and
*salvation; the importance of the affective, emotive and intuitive
dimensions of human life; and the importance of the practical outworking
of Christian commitment in a life of service to God and others.
prosopon. Greek for "face" or "appearance."
Protestantism, Protestant principle. Protestantism is the product of the
"protestation" movement within Christianity that originated in the
sixteenth-century *Reformation and was later focused in the main
Protestant traditions (*Lutheran, *Calvinist/ Presbyterian and
*Anglican/Episcopalian). Because Protestants emphasized the primacy of
Scripture against the Roman Catholic elevation of tradition alongside the
Bible, the Protestant principle suggests that believers ought to read and
seek to understand the Scriptures, and that church practice ought to be
continually subjected to the scrutiny of Scripture. The Protestant principle
declares that the final authority in the church is the Holy Spirit speaking
through the Scriptures.
providence. Although providence is not a biblical term, both the OT and
NT set forth an understanding of God's gracious outworking of the divine
purpose in Christ within the created order in human history. The world and
humanity are not ruled by chance or by fate but by God, who directs
history and creation toward an ultimate goal. Providence therefore refers
to God's superintending activity over human actions and human history,
bringing creation to its divinely determined goal.
purgatory. In Catholic theology, the place of purification and maturation
that one may need to enter after death before the perfected soul attains the
"beatific vision"-that is, perfectly "seeing" and "knowing" the triune God.
Protestants have generally rejected the concept as having no basis in
Scripture and as denying the significance and finality of mortal life on
earth.
Puritanism. A reform movement that originally sought to "pu rift'" the
Church of England after the English Reformation. Eventually Puritanism
focused on purification of both individuals and society through the reform
of church and state according to biblical principles. The Puritans held to a
*covenantal theology and the conviction that Scripture was authoritative
for personal behavior and church organization.
quest of the historical Jesus. The nineteenth-century movement that sought
to separate and distinguish the man Jesus of Nazareth from the Christ of
faith as proclaimed by the church. The proponents of this quest concluded
that the "historical" (nonsupernatural) Jesus never made any messianic
claim, never predicted his death or resurrection and never instituted the
*sacraments now followed by the church. Instead the biblical stories that
assign these acts to Jesus are nonhistorical "*myths" that, together with
certain philosophical and theological claims set forth in the NT
documents, were projected onto him by his disciples, the Gospel writers
and the early church. The true historical Jesus, in contrast, preached a
simple, largely ethical message as capsulized in the dictum of the
"fatherhood of God" and the "brotherhood of humankind."
R
Radical Reformation. Also known as the left wing of the Reformation or
the Third Reformation, this phrase designates the loose coalition of
reforming groups that did not wish to be identified with the *magisterial
reformation of *Zwingli, Luther and Calvin. The three main groups that
made up the Radical Reformation are the *Anabaptists, the spiritualists
and the evangelical rationalists. These groups shared a common
disappointment with much of Protestantism. As a result, they rejected and
went beyond some of the doctrines and institutions of the traditional
Reformation churches. See also Calvinism, John Calvin; Lutheranism.
ransom theory of the atonement. The view that through human sin people
rightfully belong to, or come under, the authority of Satan and that to
remedy this situation God offered his Son as a ransom in exchange for
humankind. But because Jesus could not be kept in hell, he rose on the
third day, thereby causing Satan to lose those he held captive. This theory
was widely taught during the *patristic era. See also atonement.
rapture. From the Latin rapio (caught up), the belief that the church will be
caught up (Greek harpazo, 1 Thess 4:17) and united with Christ at his
second coming. One point of contention among theologians is the time of
the rapture, especially in relation to the great *tribulation period
associated with the end of the age. The views regarding the related timing
of these events lead to the designations pre-
, mid- and posttribulationists
for the views that the rapture occurs prior to, during or at the end of the
tribulation. Some theologians view the rapture as a biblical image
referring to the church's greeting the returning Christ.
reader-response theory of hermeneutics. A postmodern form of literary
criticism that explores the capacity of the biblical texts to shape, revise or
confirm the expectations readers bring to their reading of the text. This
approach challenges the assumption of much of modern *hermeneutics
that the main task of exegesis is to approach a text as a disinterested
exegete and to determine, through the use of scientific strategies of
interpretation, the intent of the original author of the text. Reader-response
theorists, in contrast, maintain that the reader and the text are
interdependent. What is important then is not so much the intent of the
original author of the text but the "conversation" between reader and text
that emerges in the reading of the text.
real presence of Christ in the Eucharist. The belief that Jesus Christ is
actually physically and sacramentally present in the bread and the wine at
the Lord's Table, or Holy Communion. The biblical basis for this view
includes a literal understanding of Jesus' words of institution, "This is my
body. ... This is my blood" (Mk 14:22, 24) as well as the supposed allusion
to the *Eucharist in Jesus' bread-of-life discourse (Jn 6:53-58). The real
presence is taught by Lutherans and Roman Catholics (with substantial
differences). See also consubstantiation; transubstantiation.
realism. A philosophical mindset that maintains that "universals" have a
separate reality from and exist outside of the the mind. Although the
proposal itself goes back to *Plato, it became theologically important in
the Middle Ages as a heated debate emerged between realists and the
nominalists. The realists maintained that properties (e.g., whiteness as a
property of snow) exist independently of our thought, just as objects do.
Consequently, for realists God's attributes (e.g., love and holiness) also
have independent existence, just as God does. See also nominalism.
reconciliation. A change in relationship or attitude from enmity to peace;
the cessation of hostility in attitude or action. Reconciliation is a central
doctrine of Christianity. Specifically, in Christ God reconciled the sinful,
hostile world to himself by Christ's taking upon himself the cost of our
hostility and enmity, thereby setting the world free to restored union with
God (2 Cor 5:19). The foundational assumption of the gospel is that only
God can bear and remove the consequences of human enmity toward God
and the resulting separation from God; therefore God alone can effect this
change in relationship.
reconstructionism. A variety of contemporary *postmillennialism that
asserts that our Christian duty moves beyond individual moral holiness to
include a public, social responsibility to force society to obey the divine
law revealed in the Bible through such means as government legislation.
On the basis of an appeal to the idea of "dominion" (our human calling to
exercise dominion over the earth), reconstructionists set as their goal the
establishment of a Christian republic in which God's law rules.
redaction criticism. An approach to biblical interpretation focusing on the
literary, theological contributions of the biblical authors by analyzing the
way they modified their sources to arrive creatively and purposefully at
their own special emphases.
redemption. The process by which sinful humans are "bought back" from
the bondage of sin into relationship with God through grace by the
"payment" of Jesus' death. Redemption is one of the pictures or metaphors
that the NT uses to give insight into God's gracious saving work in Jesus.
Reformation. The general term for the period of massive ecclesial and
theological change in Western Christianity that had its roots as early as the
fourteenth century and lasted into the seventeenth century. The
Reformation refers more specifically to the break with medieval Roman
Catholicism launched in the sixteenth century by such luminaries as
Martin *Luther, Ulrich *Zwingli and John *Calvin, who protested against
what they perceived as the overall degeneracy of the Roman Church and
its departure from what the Reformers saw as the faith of the apostles and
early church fathers.
Reformed tradition, Reformed theology. The tradition and theological
framework that grew out of the teachings of John *Calvin and Ulrich
*Zwingli, as distinct from the *Lutheran and *Anabaptist traditions.
Reformed theology focuses foundationally on God's glory and often
emphasizes divine sovereignty as a crucial beginning point for theological
reflection.
regeneration. A biblical motif of *salvation that emphasizes the rebirth or
re-creation of fallen human beings by the indwelling Holy Spirit. One
central biblical text depicting salvation as regeneration is Jesus'
conversation with Nicodemus in which he emphasized the necessity of
being "born again" (Jn 3:1-21).
reincarnation. The belief that human souls individually migrate from one
body to another through a succession of lives until complete purification is
achieved and they are finally joined to the ultimate reality, God. Although
taught by the Greek philosopher *Plato, reincarnation is more generally
associated with Eastern religions such as Hinduism. Reincarnation is
generally deemed incompatible with the Christian doctrine of
*resurrection.
relativism. The theory that denies that humans can possess any objective,
universally meaningful knowledge, that there are any ultimate and
unchanging *metaphysical realities (God, persons, space, time, natural
laws) or that there are any moral absolutes. Hence meaning and truth are
relative to each culture and historical period or to each person, situation,
relationship and outcome.
Religionsgeschichtliche Schule. German for "history-of-religion school,"
the influential group of German biblical scholars who between 1880 and
1920 emphasized extensive use of data from comparative studies of other
religions to interpret Christianity. Participants in this movement (such as
Hermann Gunkel) minimized doctrinal issues in favor of tracing
historical, "mythological" developments through Judaism, Christianity and
other ancient religions.
Renaissance. French for "rebirth," this term refers to the period of time
roughly between 1400 and 1600 during which there was a perceived return
to or rebirth of the aesthetic and artistic values of ancient Greece and
Rome. The Renaissance entailed a shift from the medieval perception of
reality in spiritual terms (with God occupying the central role) to one in
which humans were the central figures. Hence this period is often depicted
as an era of *humanism. See also Erasmus, Desiderius.
resurrection. The central, defining doctrine and claim of the Christian faith
is the resurrection of Jesus Christ, whom God brought forth from the dead.
The resurrection of the dead refers to the promise based on the bodily
resurrection of Jesus, that all believers will one day join Christ in the
resurrection. Believers will be transformed, that is, renewed both morally
and physically with "spiritual" bodies adapted for eternal life with God.
revelation. Refers both to the process by which God discloses the divine
nature and the mystery of the divine will and purpose to human beings,
and to the corpus of truth disclosed. Some theologians maintain that
revelation consists of both God's activity in *salvation history through
word and deed, culminating in Jesus (who mediates and fulfills God's self-
revelation) and the ongoing activity of God to move people to yield to,
accept and personally appropriate that reality. *General revelation
maintains that God's existence and particular attributes can be ascertained
through an innate sense of God's reality and conscience as well as through
observation of the universe and history. *Special revelation refers to the
more specific divine self-disclosure to and through certain persons that
brings about human salvation.
revivalism. A historical movement within the church that finds its roots in
the *Reformation, *Pietism and English *Puritanism but reached its zenith
in the late eighteenth to early twentieth centuries. Revivalism emphasizes
the involvement of the emotional as well as the rational dimensions of the
human person in a personal event of *conversion as the appropriate
response to hearing and receiving the gospel. Revivalism as a type of
religious practice often includes mass meetings with gospel music and
biblical preaching, and with a strongly emotional appeal for a personal,
subjective and public response.
righteousness. An attribute of God's being; God's right and just character,
actions and judgments. God's righteousness as understood in a covenantal
context includes God's right judgment of both God's own people and those
who oppress them, as well as God's *salvation and mercy extended to
those to whom the covenanting God has promised to be faithful.
Righteousness and salvation are summed up in and provided for all those
who believe in the death and *resurrection of Jesus Christ. By extension,
righteousness denotes the type of life that ought to characterize Jesus'
disciples. Believers are to "imitate" God and thereby become righteous in
life just as God is righteous.
Ritschl, Albrecht (1822-1889). A significant German Lutheran theologian
often viewed as the paradigm of nineteenth-century Protestant *liberalism.
Following the lead of Immanuel *Kant, Ritschl differentiated between
scientific knowledge (the attempt to understand reality from a neutral
standpoint) and religious knowledge (value judgments about reality).
Theology, in turn, is the system of value judgments based on the effects of
God on the lives of Christians. Central to Ritschl's theologywas the
concept of the *kingdom of God. He viewed the church as the community
of people who collectively make the value judgment that our highest
human good is found in the kingdom of God as revealed in Jesus.
Romanticism. A movement (perhaps better described as an attitude or
temperament) within the humanities during the late eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries in reaction to *Enlightenment rationalism and
classicism. Romanticism emphasized a subjective, expressive and
existential outlook; engagement with the natural, sensual world; and the
priority of the imagination over things rational and ordered. Romanticism
influenced the theology of Friedrich *Schleiermacher.
S
Sabellianism. An early-third-century trinitarian heresy named for
Sabellius, who taught that the one God revealed himself successively in
salvation history first as Father (Creator and Lawgiver), then as Son
(Redeemer) and finally as Spirit (Sustainer, Giver of Grace). Hence for
Sabellius there is only one divine person, not three as in Christian
trinitarianism.
sacerdotalism. The emphasis in the Roman Catholic tradition, especially
as proclaimed in the Middle Ages, on the powers of earthly priests as
essential mediators between God and humankind. Saccrdotalism teaches
that by virtue of *ordination priests have the gifting of the Spirit whereby
they are able to transform mundane physical elements (water, bread and
wine) into means of grace.
sacrament, sacramentalism. Terms used by many Christian traditions to
refer to the sacred practices of the church. *Augustine spoke of these acts
as "the visible form of an invisible grace" or as a "sign of a sacred thing."
Mysteriously, the sacraments are used by God to confirm divine promises
to believers and are somehow the means by which the recipient enters into
the truths they represent. The two primary sacraments are *baptism and
the *Lord's Supper. The lesser sacraments in the Roman Catholic tradition
include confirmation, penance, matrimony, ordination (orders) and
extreme unction. Protestant theology emphasizes the need for faith in
order for a sacrament to have meaning. Sacramentalism refers to any
understanding of the Christian faith that places high value on the
sacraments. More narrowly, sacramentalism can be a term used
pejoratively of persons or church traditions that see the essence of
Christianity as participation in the sacraments rather than as inner
transformation and personal piety. See ex opere operato.
saints. In the NT, synonymous with the people of God, the church of Jesus
Christ. Its OT antecedence implies the idea of being set apart for God as
well as conformity to God's likeness through the work of the indwelling
Holy Spirit. In the Roman Catholic tradition the saints are persons who
have been specially graced by God's Spirit to live in an exemplary manner
and to perform special feats. Catholic piety includes veneration of, and
prayer to, the saints.
salvation. A broad term referring to God's activity on behalf of creation
and especially humans in bringing all things to God's intended goal. More
specifically, salvation entails God's deliverance of humans from the power
and effects of sin and the *Fall through the work of Jesus Christ so that
creation in general and humans in particular can enjoy the fullness of life
intended for what God has made.
sanctification. From the Hebrew and Greek, "to be set apart" from
common use,
"to be made holy." The nature of sanctification is twofold in
that Christians have been made holy through Christ and are called to
continue to grow into and strive for holiness by cooperating with the
indwelling Holy Spirit until they enjoy complete conformity to Christ
(*glorification). See also Methodism.
satisfaction theory of the atonement. Originating with *Anselm, an
understanding of the work of Christ based on the *metaphor of God as a
Sovereign who, having been dishonored by sin, must receive satisfaction.
Because through sin humans perpetrated the insult, only a human should
provide such satisfaction, but the insult was so great that only God can do
so. In that he is both God and man, Jesus Christ was able to provide the
necessary satisfaction primarily through his obedient death. See also
atonement.
Schleiermacher, Friedrich (1768-1834). Influential Protestant theologian
who attempted to make religion relevant to the German intelligentsia who
were steeped in *Romanticism. Schleiermacher emphasized intuition and
feeling as the basis of religion (independent of doctrine) and defined
religion as the feeling of absolute dependence that finds its highest
expression in *monotheism. According to Schleiermacher, Christianity is
the highest religion, but in that this feeling may assume diverse individual
and cultural religious forms, Christianity may not be the only true
religion.
scholasticism. Originally the educational tradition of the medieval
schools, but more specifically the method of philosophical and theological
reflection set forth most succinctly by Thomas *Aquinas. In attempting to
understand better the deep meanings of Christian doctrine, scholasticism
aimed to synthesize classical Greek and Roman philosophy with Christian
writings and Scripture using Aristotelianism and *Platonism to provide a
clear and defined systematic structure. After the *Reformation, certain
Protestant theologians continued the scholastic tradition, especially as
they came to focus on the quest for right doctrine understood in the form
of correct assertions or propositions.
Scripture principle. The Bible read and understood as the Word of God.
The Scripture principle, associated with Reformed theologians, holds that
the beliefs and practices of the church must be grounded in and derive
authority from Scripture.
sect, sectarianism. Originally Latin for "school," or "faction," the term sect
refers to a subgroup of a larger, usually religious body that is identifiable
by its own leadership and teaching and practices. Sects are generally
groups that have split off from a larger group or have maintained a unique
identity within a larger group. They simply may be unorganized religious
movements. Sectarianism is rigid devotion to a sect. In another sense
sectarianism refers to the belief that one's own group is the true church in
distinction from other groups that are deemed false churches.
secularism, secular humanism. Derived from a word that means simply
"belonging to this age," or "worldly," secularism is more specifically the
belief system that denies the reality of God, religion and the supernatural
order and hence maintains that reality entails only this natural world.
Secular humanism in turn promotes and glorifies the human creature to
the exclusion and denial of the Creator.
Semi-Pelagianism. A word that later came to be used to describe the
doctrines proposed between A.D. 427 and 529 which theologically held a
middle ground between Pelagius and *Augustine. Semi-Pelagians
maintain that faith begins independently of God's grace, although such
grace is subsequently necessary for *salvation, and that *predestination is
simply divine foreknowledge. See Pelagianism.
sensusplenior. Latin, meaning the "plenary," or "fuller sense." The sensus
plenior is the meaning of the Bible as it has come to be interpreted through
Christian history while seeking to remain true to the primary sense of what
the biblical author meant to convey. The term has also been applied to the
manner in which NT writers sometimes reinterpret OT texts.
similitudo Dei. Latin for "likeness of God." Based on a distinction made as
early as *Irenaeus between the likeness and the image of God (see imago
Dei), some theologians (e.g., *Aquinas) held the likeness to be the
supernatural gift of righteousness Adam enjoyed in the Garden but lost in
the Fall, in contrast to the natural powers related to the divine image that
fallen humans retain. This distinction was rejected by the Reformers.
sin. The fundamental unbelief, distrust and rejection of God and human
displacement of God as the center of reality. The Bible presents sin as both
fallen humanity's state of separation and alienation from God and as a
person's purposeful disobedience to God's will as evidenced in concrete
thought or act. As an inherent part of the human condition sin is universal,
and it is both corporate and individual.
sinlessness of Christ. The doctrine that Jesus was without sin, free from all
transgression of the law and thus able to do the will of the Father in
complete holiness. The early debates about Jesus' sinlessness focused on
whether his temptations were real, given the *paradox of his being sinless
and yet able to be tempted. The question debated was whether Jesus was
"able not to sin" (potuit non peccare) or "not able to sin" (non potuit
peccare).
sociology of knowledge. An *epistemological theory that asserts that
human knowledge is shaped by social forces. In contrast to the
*Enlightenment assumption that knowledge arises as the neutral observer
discovers objective truth about the external world, this theory sets forth
the idea that knowledge is not neutral or value-free but tends to embody
the social circumstances and conditions of the cultural milieu. More
important, knowledge tends to reflect the vested interests of the knower.
Bola fide. Latin for "faith only," the Lutheran, * Reformation doctrine that
the only way to be justified and receive God's grace is through faith, that
is, by accepting Christ's merits on one's own behalf.
solagratia. Latin for "grace only," the Lutheran, *Reformation doctrine that
*salvation is God's free gift accomplished by Christ's saving death and
*resurrection rather than by human action. *Righteousness, or
*justification, comes by God's free gift of grace alone through faith.
Roman Catholic doctrine, in contrast, insisted that God requires free
human cooperation, although it is God alone who makes such cooperation
possible.
Bola scriptura. Latin for "Scripture only," the Lutheran, *Reformation
principle that Scripture-not Scripture plus church tradition-is the source of
Christian revelation. As a result, Scripture is to rule as God's word in the
church, unencumbered by papal and ecclesiastical *magisterium (*dogma)
and unrivaled by the supposed additional revelation that comes through
church tradition.
soteriology. Literally,
"the study of *salvation." This topic within the
corpus of *systematic theology deals with the work of the triune God in
bringing creation, and especially humans, to enjoy the divine purpose for
existence. More specifically,
"objective" soteriology speaks of the life,
death, resurrection and exaltation of Christ in relation to human salvation.
In addition, "subjective" soteriology (the work of the Spirit in the
application of Christ's salvation) deals with the process whereby
individuals are brought to God's saving goals. Topics generally covered
include *election, calling, *regeneration, *faith, repentance, conversion,
*justification, *sanctification and *glorification.
soul. The spiritual nature, life, being or *essence of the individual human
(the unique "person") often thought to survive after death. Theological
debates have focused on whether the human person consists of spirit and
body in addition to soul, whether the soul is an entity in distinction from
the body or whether soul simply refers to the single embodied person as a
whole.
source (of theology). Related to theological *norms, the "raw material"
involved in theological construction, or that to which theologians appeal in
the construction of a systematic delineation of Christian doctrine.
Theological sources influence the shape of a theological construction as
well as provide its content. Evangelical theologians appeal to Scripture as
the primary source as well as the or norming norm, for theology. Other
resources that theologians sometimes propose as theological sources
include tradition, reason, culture and experience.
sovereignty. The biblical concept of God's kingly, supreme rule and legal
authority over the entire universe. God's sovereignty is expressed,
exercised and displayed in the divine plan for and outworking of salvation
history. Divine sovereignty is emphasized especially in the Augustinian-
Calvinist tradition, where it is paradoxically contrasted with human
responsibility.
special revelation. God's divine self-revelation evidenced specifically in
salvation history and culminating in the *incarnation as understood
through Scripture. Although the Bible seemingly affirms both *general
and special revelation (see revelation), only special revelation can disclose
completely our sinful predicament, as well as God's promise of * salvation
and its fulfillment in Christ.
spiration. Literally,
"breathing," the term used to describe the way the
Spirit proceeds from the Father (and the Son).
Spirit, spirit. Connected with "wind" and "breath," spirit refers to life
itself, to the life principle and above all to God as the source and giver of
life. In addition, the Holy Spirit is the third person of the one triune God
and as such is the Life Giver.
spirituality, Christian. The believer's relationship with God and life in the
Spirit as a member of the church of Jesus Christ. Today spirituality often
refers to an interest in or concern for matters of the "spirit" in contrast to
the mere interest and focus on the material. Christian spirituality in turn
entails a desire to allow one's Christian commitment to shape every
dimension of life. Some see Christian spirituality as expressed through
participation in certain Christian practices, such as Bible study, prayer,
worship and so forth.
structuralism, structuralist exegesis. A broad movement in literary
*criticism incorporating several different approaches, structuralism
contends that meaning is the product of "deep structures"
-basic, universal
ways of understanding and articu lating things-that are found in the text.
Structuralism seeks to identify and classify these structures and then use
them to assist in interpretation.
subjectivism. The theory or doctrine that limits knowledge to personal (or
perhaps even private) experience. What is supremely good and right can
only be ascertained by individual feeling or apprehension.
sublapsarianism, infralapsarianism. Related to a debate among Calvinists
over the intricacies of divine election, this position asserts that God's
decree of *election logically follows God's decree to allow the *Fall of
humankind into sin. That is, the decree of election is "sublapsarian" in
contrast to "supralapsarian," which places this decree prior to the decree to
allow the Fall. Consequently, sublapsarians view *election as God's
predetermined, willed response to the Fall. See also supralapsarianism.
subordinationism. A second- and third-century *heresy that held that
because the Son and the Spirit proceed from the Father, they arc not equal
to the Father and are thus not fully divine.
substantia. Latin for "substance," referring to *essence or essential nature.
The matter of the substantia of God was a primary issue in patristic and
medieval developments of the doctrine of Christ and the *Trinity.
Summa Theologica (Summa). Latin for a "summary of theology," the
phrase more specifically refers to the major systematic theology of
Thomas *Aquinas.
summum bonum. A Latin phrase referring to the "supreme good" from
which all other good is derived. In medieval theology the human supreme
good was depicted as the "beatific vision," the contemplation of the eternal
*essence of God.
supralapsarianism. A *Calvinistic view of *predestination that maintains
that in the "logical order of divine decrees" God decreed the *election of
some persons and the reprobation of others before allowing the *Fall of
Adam. Hence the *decree of election is "supralapsarian." In
supralapsarianism the emphasis is on God's *predestination of uncreated
and unfallen humans rather than on created and fallen humanity
(sublapsarianism). Consequently the supralapsarian view leads to the idea
of double predestination: God has chosen to glorify himself by
predestining certain persons to eternal life and others to eternal
condemnation. See also sublapsarianism, infralapsarianism.
syncretism. The attempt to assimilate differing or opposite doctrines and
practices, especially between philosophical and religious systems,
resulting in a new system altogether in which the fundamental structure
and tenets of each have been changed. Syncretism of the gospel occurs
when its essential character is confused with elements from the culture. In
syncretism the gospel is lost as the church simply confirms what is already
present in the culture.
Synod of Dort. The assembly (synod) of the Dutch Reformed Church
convened at Dort in 1618-1619 to deal primarily with the issues of
separation of church and state and the Arminian controversy. The synod
was biased against *Arminianism and produced the Canons of Dort, which
upheld the doctrines of the total depravity of humankind, unconditional
*election, *limited atonement, the irresistibility of divine grace and the
final *perseverance (or God's preservation) of the saints. See also
Calvinism, John Calvin; TULIP.
Synoptic Gospels, synoptic problem. The Synoptic Gospels are Matthew,
Mark and Luke, which reflect many similarities to each other, in contrast
to John's Gospel, which provides a quite different (albeit complementary)
picture of Jesus. The synoptic problem centers around the literary relation
and interdependence among the three Gospels based on their shared
subject matter and frequent textual similarities.
systematic theology. The attempt to summarize religious truth or the belief
system of a religious group (such as Christianity) through an organized
system of thought carried out within a particular cultural and intellectual
context (see method of theology). A common systematic order in Christian
theology begins with God and God's self-revelation, followed by creation
and the predicament of sin, God's saving work in and through Jesus Christ,
the Spirit as the agent in personal *salvation, the church as the redeemed
community of God's people, and finally the goal of God's program as
leading to the end of the age, Christ's return and eternity.
T
teleological argument. An argument for the existence of God based on the
seemingly purposeful order of the universe that suggests the world is the
work of a "Master Architect" rather than a result of chance. Important
proponents of teleological arguments include the medieval theologian
Thomas *Aquinas and the *Enlightenment apologist William Paley (1743-
1805).
Tertullian (A.D. 160-220). Next to *Augustine perhaps the greatest
Western theologian of the *patristic period. Tertullian was one of the first
major Christian theologians to write in Latin (the language of Western
theology) and authored many apologetic, theological and controversial
works in defense of Christianity. Tertullian is often credited as being the
first important theologian to use the term *Trinity, describing God as "one
substance in three persons."
theism. The system of belief that presupposes the reality of God as the
foundational concept informing all other beliefs. Any worldview anchored
in the belief that there is a God.
theistic evolutionism. An understanding of the development of life on
earth that arose out of the attempt to relate the interpretation of Genesis to
the scientific theory of organic evolution by taking a nonliteral view of the
creation account while wholeheartedly trusting its truthfulness as the Word
of God. Theistic evolution teaches that while the various species emerged
through the evolutionary process, God superintended the development of
life. That is, evolution was the means that God used in bringing about the
divine purpose of creating life on this planet. Theistic evolutionists
generally maintain the classical Christian doctrines of creation, original
sin and human depravity in need of redemption.
theocentricity. Holding God as the central object of focus and interest as
well as our ultimate concern. Hence, to be theocentric is to view all of life,
including *ethics, from the perspective of a commitment to God.
theodicy. A response to the problem of evil in the world that attempts
logically, relevantly and consistently to defend God as simultaneously
omnipotent, all-loving and just despite the reality of evil.
theologia crucis, theologiagloriae. In his theologia crucis (theology of the
cross) Luther contended that the true and consummate place of God's self-
revelation is in the humility, weakness and suffering love of God displayed
on the cross of Christ. Luther opposed the idea of a theologiagloriae
(theology of glory) that advocated the knowledge of God through God's
works in the cosmos.
theological method. See method in theology, methodology. theology. A
religious belief system about God or ultimate reality. Theology commonly
refers to the ordered, systematic study or interpretation of the Christian
faith and experience of God based on God's divine self-revelation.
Theology also seeks to apply these truths to the full breadth of human
experience and thought.
theology of hope. An *eschatological approach to theology originating in
Germany in the 1960s and associated most often with Jurgen Moltmann
(1926). The theology of hope views the future as already begun in the
present based on the hope and promise generated by Christ's *resurrection.
As a result, the church is to be a people of hope who experience God in the
present through God's promises, who maintain a corporate rather than
merely a private understanding of *salvation and who confront the present
age with a vision of transformation.
theopneustos. Greek for "God-breathed," or "God-inspired." Generally this
word is used to describe the divine dimension of Scripture either as
divinely inspired documents (see 2 Tim 3:16) or as the product of divinely
inspired authors (2 Pet 1:2 1).
third use of the law. The addition of a third purpose for the divine law
beyond its role in suppressing human wickedness and acting as a
"schoolmaster" leading sinful humans to Christ. In its third use the law
provides direction for believers along the pathway of *sanctification.
Whereas the *Lutheran tradition tends to focus on the first two uses,
*Reformed theologians also give place to the third, which leads to a
stronger emphasis on sanctification as growth in obedience to the divine
law.
Thirty-Nine Articles. the. The set of doctrinal formulas (short summaries
of doctrinal tenets) presenting the formal position of the Church of
England (as of 1563) in response to and in the context of the key
controversies of the English Reformation in the sixteenth century.
Thomism, neo-Thomism. Thomism refers to the teachings of Thomas
*Aquinas and the subsequent philosophical and theological schools that
were based on his thought. The twentiethcentury revival of Thomism,
known as neo-Thomism, took two major forms: transcendental Thomism
(represented by Karl Rahner and Bernard Lonergan) accommodates the
major concerns of Thomism with insights from Immanuel *Kant, whereas
neoscholastic Thomism (represented by Etienne Gilson and Jacques
Maritain) seeks to recover and reaffirm a "pure version" of Aquinas's
original teachings.
Tillich, Paul (1886-1965). One of the most influential Protestant
theologians of the twentieth century, Tillich developed a philosophical
theology to respond to and seriously interact with modern culture. Best
known for his *method of correlation, Tillich argued that all reality-
including God, the Ground of Being-can be known only through myth and
symbol. By participating in the Ground of Being as revealed by the "New
Being," humans can move from fallen "nonbeing" into new, human
"being," whose perfect symbol is Jesus the Christ.
time, timelessness. Time refers to the relation of events within creation to
each other. Generally events are viewed as forming a linear succession,
leading to the idea of the "time line." But the succession of events might
also be cyclical, resulting in time as a circle. The Bible presents time as a
divinely created reality in which God historically works out the divine
plan of *salvation. Thus time begins "in the beginning" and moves linearly
toward a future goal. Philosophers and theologians have debated how time
and eternity are related, as well as the nature of the connection between
God and time. Some thinkers assert that time and eternity arc totally
distinct, while others collapse them, in part as a reaction against viewing
time as itself being an entity. Theologians who assert that God is timeless
maintain that God created time and therefore stands "above" the temporal
flow. Others suggest that God travels with creation through time.
tradition, traditionalism. Among the early Christian fathers, tradition
(meaning something "handed over") meant the revelation of God made
known to people through the prophets and apostles. Eventually the term
came to mean the Scripture and *creeds, and still later it included the
accumulated explanations of the faith and wisdom of the church though
history. In reaction to eighteenth-century rationalism, certain nineteenth-
century Roman Catholic thinkers upheld the idea that knowledge of God
could only be attained through faith in revealed, unbroken and infallible
tradition (traditionalism) as opposed to such means as *natural theology
and human reason.
traducianism. The view that in addition to the human body the human soul
is transmitted from the parents to the child, rather than being created
specifically for that human body by God ex nihilo (*creationism).
Although it may be dated to the patristic era, this teaching has been
especially strong in Lutheran circles, in contrast to the Roman Catholic
and Reformed preference for creationism.
transcendence. The attribute of God that refers to being wholly and
distinctly separate from creation (although always actively involved in and
with it as well). The declaration that God is transcendent means that God
is "above" the world and comes to creation from "beyond." During the
medieval era God's transcendence was especially emphasized, as is
evident in the archi tecture of the great gothic cathedrals with their high,
arched ceilings that lift one's gaze upward.
transcendental philosophy, theology. A philosophy that emphasizes the
transcendent as the fundamental reality, that seeks to identify the
preconditions for human knowledge and experience, and that embraces the
ultimate unknowability of ultimate reality. Transcendental theology
assumes that humans are transcendent (spirit as well as matter) in that
they are oriented toward an infinite, mysterious horizon of being (God)
and thus open to and receptive of divine revelation.
transubstantiation. A term in Roman Catholic theology meaning "essential
change," the belief that by the power of God at the consecration in the
Mass, the bread and wine change substance into the actual substance of
Jesus' body and blood, even though they seem to retain their natural
characteristics.
tribulation. The internal and external suffering of God's people which,
according to NT teaching, followers of Jesus Christ are to expect as a
matter of course. The NT references to the "great tribulation" describe an
unprecedented period of global suffering that will mark the time just prior
to the *parousia. Different millennial views place the time of the
tribulation at different points in relation to the *millennium. Likewise,
different views on the time of the *rapture place this event at different
points in relation to the *eschatological tribulation.
trichotomism. An understanding of human nature as divided into three
parts: body, soul and spirit (e.g., 1 Thess 5:23; Heb 4:12). According to
trichotomists, the spirit, the part of a human being that is capable of
knowing God, is to be differentiated from the soul, which is the seat of the
personality. Often numbered among trichotomists are the church father
*Irenaeus and the nineteenthcentury biblical scholar Franz Delitzsch. The
viewpoint can be found as well in the Scofield Reference Bible.
Trinity. The Christian understanding of God as triune. Trinity means that
the one divine nature is a unity of three persons and that God is revealed as
three distinct persons: Father, Son and Holy Spirit. The ultimate basis for
the Christian doctrine of the Trinity lies in the divine self-disclosure in
Jesus, who as the Son revealed the Father and poured out the Holy Spirit.
See also economic Trinity; immanent Trinity.
tritheism. A distorted belief in three different Gods-Father, Son and Spirit-
rather than one God who is unified and yet diversely three persons
(*Trinity).
truth. That which reflects factual and/or spiritual reality. Some thinkers
view truth in purely intellectual categories, namely, as the affirmation of
what is. Hence truth becomes correct assertions or factual statements
(factuality). In recent times certain thinkers have suggested that truth is
subjective, relative and pluralistic. Viewed from a theological perspective,
truth is grounded in the being and will of the triune God. Hence whatever
reflects God's own being and will is truth. Furthermore, Jesus Christ is the
truth in that he is the *revelation of God.
TULIP. An acronym referring to the five theological tenets affirmed at the
*Synod of Dort (total *depravity, unconditional *election, *limited
atonement, irresistible grace, the *perseverance [or divine preservation] of
the saints). Since then, this acronym has come to be used as a summary of
the teaching of Calvinism. See also Calvinism, John Calvin.
two natures, doctrine of. A way of describing the orthodox position about
the person of Christ as being fully human and fully divine. Upheld at the
*Council of Ephesus (AD.431) and clarified at the Council of Chalcedon
(A.D.451), the two-natures doctrine affirms that the one person Jesus
Christ is both divine and human. In the incarnation the two natures became
united in one person. As a result, the two form a *hypostasis (that is, they
do not merely exist side by side), although they remain distinct (that is,
they arc not coalesced or changed into a composite third nature).
typology. Differing from a symbol or an allegory, a typology is a
representation of an actual, historical reference. According to Christian
exegesis, biblical typology deals with the parallels between actual,
historical (usually OT) figures or events in *salvation history and their
later, analogous fulfillment. Often NT events and figures are typologically
understood and interpreted according to an OT pattern (e.g., creation and
the new creation, Adam and Christ, the exodus and NT concepts of
salvation). On this basis typology became one of the four prevalent ways
(together with the literal, the analogical and the spiritual) of interpreting
Scripture in the Middle Ages.
U
ubiquity, ubiquitarianism. The doctrine developed by Luther and
maintained by many of his followers that Christ in his human nature is
present everywhere. Lutherans appeal to the doctrine of the ubiquity of
Christ to support the belief that Christ is physically present in the
*eucharistic elements (the *real pres ence), in contrast to *Reformed
thinkers (e.g., *Zwingli) who argue that the physical Jesus is localized at
the right hand of the Father in heaven and therefore cannot be present in
the bread and the wine.
ultimate concern. The idea arising from Paul *Tillich that everyone has
something that is of highest importance to him or her. Tillich suggested
that persons' ultimate concern, or "what con- ccrns ultimately," is their
God. In this sense, everyone is inherently religious.
unconditional election. The view (common among *Calvinists) that
*election, understood as the predetermination of the destiny of human
individuals, is based on God's sovereign, eternal *decree rather than
merely on divine foreknowledge of whether they will freely reject or
accept *salvation through Jesus Christ (as is generally taught by
*Arminians).
Unitarianism. Also referred to as antitrinitarianism, Unitarianism's roots
are the *Arian denial of the doctrine of the *Trinity (thus asserting that the
Father begat the Son at a point in time so that the Son is not eternal).
Modern, humanistic Unitarianism reflects the influences of the
*Enlightenment and nineteenthcentury transcendentalism in its further
rejection of the authority of Scripture and of the supernatural. Modern
Unitarians generally speak of Jesus as an ethical ideal, a great moral
teacher or even a messenger from God. But in Unitarian thought Jesus
cannot be the eternal Son of the eternal Father, because God is one, not
three persons.
universalism. Known historically as apokatastasis, the belief that all
persons will be saved. Hence universalism involves the affirmation of
universal *salvation and the denial of eternal punishment. Universalists
believe that ultimately all humans are somehow in union with Christ and
that in the fullness of time they will gain release from the penalty of sin
and be restored to God. Twentiethcentury universalism often rejects the
deity of Jesus and explores the "universal" bases of all religions. See also
apokatastasis.
univocal. The idea that a word carries the same meaning when applied to
God that it has when predicated of something in creation. Thus human
fatherhood and divine Fatherhood arc identical ideas. The univocal use of
language ignores God's distinctiveness and uniqueness from creation. See
equivocal.
V
Vatican, Vatican Council. Literally, an enclave within the city of Rome, the
Vatican forms the residence of the pope. Figuratively, a reference to the
pope or to papal, magisterial authority. Its present common usage also
refers to the Second Vatican Council (Vatican II: 1962-1965), which
sought to bring all aspects of Roman Catholic faith and life into harmony
with contemporary concerns or the modern age.
vestigium trinitatis. Latin for "vestiges of the *Trinity" (most likely
originating with *Augustine), the drawing of analogies to the Trinity from
the threefold related structure of certain created things. For example,
Augustine saw a vestige of the Trinity in the human person, one's self-
knowledge and one's self-love.
vestigium Dci. Latin for "vestiges of God," the view that there are
vestiges, or evidences, of the one God in the created order and that God
has revealed the divine being analogously in creation.
via eminentiae, via negativa, via causalitatus. Latin for the "way of
eminence," the via eminentiae or via analogiae (way of analogy) refers to
*Aquinas's analogical approach to the understanding of and language
about God. Aquinas considered all speech about God analogous in that it
uses finite images from creation that allow the theologian to make positive
though inadequate affirmations of God. Through the via negativa
"negative" statements (saying what God is not) are used to articulate the
ineffability of God (e.g., incomprehensibility and infallibility). Aquinas's
analogical predication depends on an interpretation of the doctrine of
creation that sees all things as brought into being and sustained by God,
who is the cause of the world, causality itself being an analogical notion.
Thus the via causalitatus allows the theologian to predicate of God all that
must be said about God as the first cause of the world.
via media. The idea (popularized by John Henry Newman in nineteenth-
century Britain) that the *Anglican Church represented a "middle way"
between Roman Catholicism and the modernizing elements (both *liberal
and *evangelical) of Protestantism.
vicarious (atonement). Literally,
"in place of." Hence in that Jesus died
"for us,
" that is, took on himself the consequences of human sin,
theologians often speak of his sacrificial, substitutionary death as a
vicarious atonement.
virgin birth (virginal conception). The doctrine that holds that the Holy
Spirit without the participation of a human father conceived Jesus in the
womb of Mary.
visible church. The church as an organization that encompasses baptized
members of local congregations, in contrast to the *invisible church,
which includes all true believers (or elect persons) and therefore is known
only to God. Alternately, the church as consisting of those who are now
living, in contrast to the invisible company of saints who have died and are
now present in heaven with God.
voluntarism. A philosophical and theological view that opposes
rationalism and elevates the place and function of human will (in contrast
to reason) in the attainment of truth and moral good. The word
voluntarism is also used to refer to the idea that the church is made up of
believers who voluntarily join together and covenant together to walk with
one another as the people of God.
Vulgate. The Latin translation of the Bible completed by Jerome (c. 347-
420), which was declared the "official edition" for the Roman Catholic
Church at the * Council of Trent (1546).
W
Wesleyanism, John Wesley (1703-1791). The various groups and churches
associated with, spawned by or that look for their genesis in John Wesley
(the founder of *Methodism) and his theology. These include the various
Methodist churches, the *Holiness Movement and *Pentecostalism.
Wesley's theology attempted to balance the doctrine of *justification by
faith with an emphasis on the Spirit's ongoing process of *sanctification in
the life of the believer. Wesleyans are often known for certain doctrines,
including entire sanctification and the second blessing. Wesleyans tend to
be *Arminian as opposed to *Calvinist in their understanding of the
dynamic of personal *salvation.
Wesleyan quadrilateral. The four "sources" on which Wesleyan theology is
often constructed and defended: Scripture, reason, tradition and
experience. There is some debate today as to whether the Wesleyan
quadrilateral actually dates to Wesley himself, although there is general
agreement that it does represent Wesley's own theological approach.
Westminster Confession and Catechisms. The confession commissioned
(and subsequently rejected) by the English Parliament to help give a
Puritan structure to the Church of England. The Westminster Confession
(completed in 1646) is the most influential of the Reformed confessions in
the English-speaking world, having been adopted by the British and
American Presbyterian denominations and certain Baptist and
Congregational denominations. The (Larger and Shorter) Westminster
Catechisms follow the theology of the Confession and are used for official
doctrinal teaching within the Reformed tradition.
will of God. God's divine purpose for creation as a whole and for human
beings in particular. Many theologians distinguish between God's "free"
will and God's "necessary" will. God's will is free in that as Creator God
acts toward creation out of freedom rather than compulsion, but God's will
is necessary in that God always acts in a manner consistent with the divine
nature or character. Theologians likewise sometimes differentiate between
God's "hidden" will (what God alone knows he will do) and God's
"revealed" will (what God discloses to humans about what he will do or
purposes that creatures do).
Word of God. Encompassing the OT meaning of what God speaks,
especially through prophetic spokespersons, the Christian meaning refers
first to God's self-revelation in Jesus Christ as the Word (e.g., Jn 1:1). It
also refers to the proclamation of the gospel of Christ and by extension to
the Scriptures that testify to the truth of Christ.
worship. The act of adoring and praising God, that is, ascribing worth to
God as the one who deserves homage and service. The church, which is to
be a worshiping community (1 Pet 2:5), expresses its worship corporately
and publicly (*liturgically) through prayer; through psalms, hymns and
spiritual songs; through the reading and exposition of Scripture; through
observance of the *sacraments; and through individual and corporate
living in holiness and service.
wrath of God. The free, subjective and holy response of God to sin and to
the evil and wickedness exhibited by creatures in opposition to God.
X) Y, z
Zwingli, Ulrich (1484-1531). The leader of the Swiss Reformation,
Zwingli is often numbered with Luther and Calvin as one of the most
influential Protestant Reformers. A strict adherent to the biblical text,
Zwingli rejected Luther's position of *consubstantiation in regard to the
presence of Christ in the *Eucharist, arguing instead for a *memorialist
view. Zwingli inspired but later broke with the developing *Anabaptist
movement.